 You can also listen to this podcast on iono.fm here. We have heard of ‘revenge travel’ post-Covid, but is there also a case of ‘revenge shopping’? We know South Africans love shopping, and it seems shoppers are back at mega malls in a big way. Shopping centre trading densities rebounded strongly last year (2022), according to the latest Clur Shopping Centre Index. In addition, major mall owners like Liberty Two Degrees and Growthpoint have over the past week or so reported or highlighted a noteworthy turnaround in regional and super-regional shopping centres performance-wise. What’s behind the turnaround? On this latest episode of The Property Pod, Belinda Clur, MD of research house Clur International, shares her insights. Her company produces the Clur Shopping Centre Index, which is part of the Clur Report, which tracks the performance of malls covering more than four million square metres of retail space in over a hundred centres across South Africa and Namibia. The report covers both the listed and unlisted property funds. Highlights of Clur’s interview appear below. You can also listen to the full podcast above or download it from iono, Spotify or Apple Podcasts. Sandton City had its best December in 2022, according to Liberty Two Degrees. Image: Dean Hutton/Bloomberg Highlights “The retail heartbeat looks strong, and the sector certainly saw a very impressive 2022 year. If we look to the results from our dominant all-centres index, we see that this closed off at a trading density level of just over R39 000 per square metre, with growth of 11.5%. So this means that our consolidated shopping centre index actually beat annual CPI by 4.6%.” “So, as you can tell, this is an encouraging set of results, given that we are certainly not living through easy times.” “You mentioned revenge travel and revenge shopping. Certainly, I think that’s relevant, but what this reflects is actually broader than simply revenge shopping and revenge travel. I think that these are both actually symptoms of a much larger force, and if I think about what this force is, to me it feels like we are in a modern renaissance that has emerged post Covid-19.” “We saw that the Covid era sped up many trends and it was a time that made people reconsider their lives, their world, their values, and I think it has certainly inspired extensive innovative and very creative ideas and thought. If I look at the trends that we are picking up, one of the key things that’s very clear is that there’s an overarching theme within this context that people want to fall in love with life again and have a life affair.” “So there’s been a stark realisation, I think, of what you can think of as the fragility of life, and people are actually seeking La Dolce Vita or ‘the sweet life’ through balance, wellness, leisure experiences, and of course Faith Popcorn’s ever-increasing cocooning trend of creating a home sanctuary.” “Just on this theme, I think it’s also important to remember that when Covid-19 lockdown hard rules kicked in, we went into a forced economic state. We weren’t in a natural economic state. People weren’t staying away from the stores because they didn’t want to go to them.” “They were staying away because this was enforced by the state. And so we certainly saw that there was a pent-up demand in the market over this period which has spilled over into recent times. This is not only true in terms of expenditure, but I think it’s also true in terms of our social need. Of course shopping centres provide a very easy and important social space, especially now that people are more relaxed about health threats. “So to sum up, in answer to your question, I think that this renaissance energy, this best-life desire, the more-at-ease consumer and the pent-up demand from both local and international consumers who are now able to travel, are certainly some of the major drivers of the growth that we’ve seen in those 2022 index results.” The index shows even stronger growth in the super-regional centres, which were particularly hard-hit during Covid. What are your thoughts on this? “Yes, that’s true. Larger centres and specifically the super-regionals have certainly come back with a bang. And, if we look at our 2022 super-regional index, this closed on an annual trading density of nearly R46 000 per square metre and 17.7% growth, which means that these centres actually beat annual CPI by 10.8% … In these times, it’s an exceptional achievement.” “While we are on this particular topic, we’ve actually seen a very interesting interplay between the larger and the smaller centres over the last few years, which has had the market talking.” “So, just to set some context – and I’m sure that you would like me to give you some of the more detailed 2022 levels, what we saw was that after a stable market trend of growth in trading density levels of between 1% to 2% from 2018, we then saw that Covid’s hard rules kicked in and our all-centres index fell into negative territory in the month of April 2020. “The market hit its worst point of negative 7.6% growth in February 2021, and then turned upwards, breaking through zero back into positive territory in July 2021 with the growth surge that followed to bring us to the end of 2022.” “So we know, as you’ve said, that larger centres took the Covid hit and they actually fell to a low of negative 11.2% in February 2021, whereas smaller centres were resilient and relatively undisrupted, performing at 1.6% positive growth at this very worst time in the market.” “I remember, if I go back in time, at this point I was questioned by market and equity analysts whether to get out of the large-centre-based stocks; obviously nobody knew what the future held. But what I encouraged was to rather understand the operational drivers behind the trend.” Listen/Read:
Why major malls need to continually innovate and invest
‘There’s definitely buoyancy back’ in retail property “What was actually happening was that large centres were forced to trade at a very low percentage of their floor area, by law, whereas the smaller centres, by virtue of their naturally more essentially focused tenant mix, could trade at nearly full floor space capacity.” “So my gut feeling at the time was that a big correction was likely once things eased up. And that, Suren, is actually exactly what we have seen happening in 2022.” During Covid we saw a boom in online shopping. Online shopping continues to grow, but it has not necessarily meant the death knell for shopping centres [that] doomsayers were predicting, especially during Covid? “Online shopping certainly hasn’t been the death knell for shopping centres. Ironically, actually, what we often see unexpectedly is that competing forces can actually have a complementary impact on each other and coexist well. This is why we see instances of businesses that started on an online-only basis now choosing to have physical stores – and reaping rewards for mixing the models.” “A perfect example of this is Yuppiechef. If we just look back, we saw this trend unfurling when hard-lockdown rules started to relax and retail categories that were broader than just essential services opened up. At this time, despite enhanced online shopping offerings and the increased tech-savviness of consumers, what we saw was that when the additional stores opened up people went back to the shopping centres and we saw an immediate sales and trading density uplift kick in.” “Consumers were not choosing one format but were actually supporting both the online and physical formats in ways that suited them.” “So if you think about it we increasingly, these days, exist between both physical and virtual worlds, which contain physical online omnichannel – and now also metaverse – retail. “But I think that ultimately physical retail seems to ground this multi-dimensional mix and be at the heart of all of these because, at the end of the day, people are real, and we need real environments. We need real humans and real connections to feed our basic nature and effectively nourish our souls.” “I think another point is that in these high-technology times, people are suffering from screen fatigue, and we need to exist in spaces outside our computers. “But I think what is really important about what these results are showing is the ongoing critical role that shopping centres play in both the community and economic spaces in South Africa. They also show that agility in response to shifting consumer dynamics is critical, and that tailored tenant mixes are helping drive the improvements in trading densities.” There seems to be a lot of activity on the leasing front in SA malls, with SA retailers in particular increasing their space? “We have seen a shift from a survival mix to more of a lifestyle mix. During the Covid era, leasing activity seemed to actually shift into quite an unusual mix of extremes. It was really a mix that was blending value, luxury and trendy elements, which reflected the way that consumers were shopping. “So effectively consumers were buying their bulk basics from the more value-oriented retailers, and they were addressing these up, specifically clothing, with luxury accessories and trendy at-leisure items.” “What we see now is a shift to a more relaxed, broader lifestyle mix that’s emerging. This is reflected quite clearly by new lettings activity because we obviously see the new lettings activity as it comes into our index over time …” “What is very clear is that there’s been a distinct uptick and renewed confidence in apparel, with the segment taking up about a third of new lettings in terms of gross lettable area, or GLA …” What are your expectations for 2023, especially in the context of record load shedding? “As much as people may be heading to the malls during load shedding in order to escape powerless homes, there is certainly a big cost to the centres in maintaining operations under these circumstances. We’ve recently seen a major fund reporting expenditure in the region of R64 000 a day at peak consumption. So it may end up in fact being a zero-sum game despite the increase in visits.” “Additionally, during load shedding many people seek out the Wi-Fi facilities in malls, which may imply a longer dwell time, coupled with lower spend in coffee shops and restaurants as a perfect example, which actually double up as rent-free offices under these circumstances. Listen/Read: Here’s how much Growthpoint is spending to keep the lights on “In general, though, the market discussions that I’m having with the landlords and the retailers, and the signals that I’m picking up, do seem to be favourable. But the economy and load shedding are both big concerns.” “Luckily we have a climate that supports solar and we see funds investing heavily in placing solar panels on the roofs at their centres, as well as making other practical investments to counter this issue. Globally the IMF [International Monetary Fund] reports that China’s reopening is stimulating growth and inflation levels are expected to drop but still be above pre-pandemic levels. So there’s some good news in that global picture.” “My gut feeling is that shopping centre trading growth will continue, but probably not at the levels we have seen in 2022.” “After the year’s recovery surge I think that a plateau and adjustment period is likely to develop where the market again finds a more natural position.” “If we look at the index, we actually see the suggestion of this pattern just starting to emerge in the latter part of 2022, especially from September, when exacerbated load shedding started. “But luckily we have the armour of the strong South African spirit, and South Africans make a plan. The retail property funds I can tell you are no exception to this. They are very hands-on, willing and passionate about keeping things going, and fighting for South Africa’s best future. This is a sector that certainly fights hard.” “I think that shopping centres will continue to be an important part of life for South African consumers, as well as an important source of life for the South African economy.” Listen to more episodes of The Property Pod here.