President Cyril Ramaphosa announced several key changes to his administration on Monday night, largely targeted at dealing with South Africa’s escalating energy crisis and improving governance in the country. Ramaphosa appointed Dr Kgosientsho Ramokgopa to the role of “Minister of Electricity”. This is one of the key new ministerial roles in government and will fall within the presidency. Ramokgopa (48) is a key ally and the president’s former investment and infrastructure czar. He is also the former mayor of the City of Tshwane. Ramaphosa said the “Minister in the Presidency responsible for resolving the electricity crisis” has “the primary task … to significantly reduce the severity and frequency of load shedding as a matter of urgency”. Energy Action Plan He noted that the minister will have the political responsibility and authority over the country’s Energy Action Plan that was developed to help fast-track the government’s plans in dealing with load shedding. “This will help to deal with the challenge of fragmentation of responsibility across various departments and ministers which, while appropriate under normal circumstances, is not conducive to a crisis response,” Ramaphosa added. Read:
Ramaphosa’s investment czar says SA infrastructure in dire state
Significant increase in capital investment needed – Godongwana
Ramaphosa’s energy interventions get the nod from industry heavyweights “The Minister will be expected to facilitate the coordination of the numerous departments and entities involved in the crisis response, work with the Eskom leadership to turn around the performance of existing power stations, and accelerate the procurement of new generation capacity,” he said. Reaction Reacting to the announcement, Business Unity South Africa CEO Cas Coovadia said the new cabinet will have to demonstrate, with urgency, that ministers will be moving with speed to address the numerous crises the country is experiencing. “The ministers do not have the luxury of taking their time in getting into their roles, but must move with urgency and implement, implement, implement,” he said. “The appointment of Dr Kgosientsho Ramokgopa as Minister of Electricity is a critical one and we will engage him urgently to see what his thinking is on dealing with the short-term load shedding crisis and the medium-term energy crisis,” added Coovadia. “We were of the view a new Minister of Electricity should not be appointed, but now that the President has appointed him, we will continue our support to help implement the President’s Energy [Action] Plan as a matter of urgency. “He [Ramokgopa] will have a significant challenge in coordinating roles between his department and that of the Minister of [Mineral] Resources and Energy and how he utilises the powers accorded to him under the State of Disaster,” said Coovadia. Listen/Read:
Mining and energy too critical for one ministry to deal with: Busa
Private sector is frustrated with government – Busa
State of disaster: No room for business to assist Business Leadership South Africa (BLSA) said in a statement that it hopes the new cabinet will provide fresh impetus to the important structural reforms under way. Bloated cabinet “At the same time, we are concerned at the addition of two new ministries within the Presidency, the new Minister of Electricity, Dr Kgosientsho Ramokgopa, and the new Minister in the Presidency Responsible for Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation, Ms Maropene Ramokgopa, given that the cabinet is already bloated,” BLSA added. “President Cyril Ramaphosa did, however, announce measures to rationalise government departments, entities and programmes which would result in fewer ministries in the configuration of government ‘going into the next administration’. “The president is bestowing wide powers on the Electricity Minister and in terms of Section 97 of the Constitution will transfer ‘certain powers and functions’ from other entities to enable the minister to execute his mandate,” BLSA noted. “With resolving the electricity crisis so critical to our economic prospects, BLSA hopes government will be united in implementing the Energy Action Plan but is concerned this attempt to endow the new Electricity Minister with overall responsibility may lead to turf wars which many not be beneficial to smooth progress,” it added. Meanwhile, BLSA raised concerns that some underperforming ministries are unchanged. “This new team, however, has an important role to play in addressing the many ills that are plaguing South Africa and we demand high standards from them,” it said. Delay Ramaphosa announced his new cabinet on Monday evening, later than initially scheduled. Before eventually taking to the podium around 8:40pm, the president had planned to deliver his announcement at 7pm, but later rescheduled to 8:30pm. As expected, Paul Mashatile was announced Deputy President, following David Mabuza’s resignation. Read: Ramaphosa appoints Mashatile as deputy president ‘Bare minimum effort’ Ramaphosa’s changes, largely focused on the urgent issues South Africa currently faces, are seen as a bare minimum effort likely to help the ANC clinch support in next year’s general elections, according to Nelson Mandela University political analyst Ongama Mtimka. Speaking to Moneyweb following the reshuffle announcement, Mtimka said Ramaphosa’s rejig of his administration was basic, adding that he’d chosen an “easy path”. “The president has seemingly resolved to do the basic minimum when it comes to the cabinet reshuffle, focusing mostly on the most urgent and necessary changes politically,” he said. “This means he’s chosen the easier path and it’s understandable given the fact that there is just a year to go to another election,” added Mtimka. Other key movers Some of the other key movers in Ramaphosa’s cabinet reshuffle were provincial representatives landing national roles, such as former City of Joburg mayor Parks Tau, and former KwaZulu-Natal premier Sihle Zikalala. Tau has been appointed Deputy Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, while Zikalala is the new Minister of Public Works and Infrastructure. Zizi Kodwa, who has been a member of parliament since 2019 and held the role of deputy minister in the presidency for State Security of South Africa, also ascends to a head a ministry in Ramaphosa’s new cabinet, becoming Minister of Sports, Arts and Culture. A notable chop was Lindiwe Sisulu, who has been criticised publicly for the controversial R1 billion Tottenham Hotspur sponsorship deal that was proposed by tourism agency, SA Tourism. Sisulu is replaced Patricia de Lille, who was named Minister of Tourism. Read:
Ramaphosa pans Tottenham Hotspur sponsorship deal
Ramaphosa strengthens hold on ANC NEC
Ramaphosa reduces size of cabinet to 28 ministers Ramaphosa’s cabinet also has a strong female showing, represented by Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, in the Ministry of Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities, Khumbudzo Ntshavheni as Minister in the Presidency and Noxolo Kiviet as the new Minister of Public Service and Administration, among others. Below is a full list of newly appointed ministers and deputy ministers. New ministers: New deputy ministers: