Can I terminate my joint life annuity and get my money back?  Dear reader, Thank you for your question. The short answer is no, you cannot terminate your joint life annuity and get your money back, although it is important to understand the reason for this. When retiring from your retirement fund, you would have used your funds (two-thirds or more) to purchase a joint life annuity which is in essence an insurance policy governed by the Long-Term Insurance Act. The transaction involved in purchasing a life annuity is that you, the policyholder, enter into a contract with a life insurance company, whereby you swap a lump sum amount for a guaranteed pension income until the death of the second-dying spouse. The nature of this transaction means that the insurer takes on all investment and inflation risk, while you enjoy peace of mind that your income is guaranteed for life. Once the policy is in place, the funds no longer belong to you but rather to the insurer, who has full control over how the money is invested. As the policyholder, you have no rights to the funds or how they are invested as you have effectively swapped the capital for a guaranteed annuity income. Your policy will set out how this income is due to increase each year, and the insurer is obliged to honour the terms of the contract regardless of how well the funds have performed. As such, once a policyholder has implemented a life annuity, it is not possible to change the terms of the contract or service providers. Further, you cannot change a life annuity into a living annuity structure. On the death of the second-dying spouse, your life annuity will automatically terminate and there will be no benefit for your heirs. As is evident from the above, while life annuities can be a great way to ensure a guaranteed income for life, they remain fairly inflexible policies, as there is no way to change the terms of the contract later on or cancel the policy if it no longer meets your needs. It is for this reason that many retirees explore the option of purchasing a living annuity, which is essentially an investment held by the annuitant, with the annuitant retaining full control of how the funds are invested. The annuitant can decide how the funds are invested and can make changes to the underlying investment portfolio as and when circumstances dictate. The annuitant must draw down between 2.5% and 17.5% of the residual value of the funds per year and can change the drawdown rates on the anniversary of the investment. When the annuitant passes away, the remaining funds in the living annuity will pass to their nominated beneficiaries, in which case the funds will not form part of their deceased estate and will not be taken into account for estate duty purposes. With many consequences being permanent in nature, it is important to explore all options before making a final decision on which option (or a combination thereof) is best suited to your needs. The decision to purchase a life- or living annuity is a hugely important one and should ideally be undertaken with guidance from an independent financial advisor. 