The 18 700 former Highveld Syndication (HS) investors will soon vote on a new settlement proposal which, in the best-case scenario, would see them losing 95% of the R4.6 billion they collectively invested. Jacques du Toit, the business rescue practitioner (BRP) of Orthotouch and Zephan, recently published a new proposed business rescue plan offering investors a cash settlement of five cents in the rand. The late Nic Georgiou owned both companies, which were tasked in 2011 with repaying investors. The identity of the offeror is not disclosed. Moneyweb believes that it is a company called Prinia, but when we put this to Du Toit, he denied it. Investors attending the first creditors meeting in 2020. Image: Moneyweb Investors need to register as creditors before 21 March, following which they will vote for or against the plan at a later date. The companies will be liquidated if 75% of the registered creditors reject the plan, leading to investors only receiving 1.6 cents in the rand. Both scenarios would result in the investors losing more than 95% of their original investments. (Investors can register claims here.) This plan differs from the first rescue plan, published in March 2020, which offered investors shares in the listed entity Accelerate. Du Toit said the five cents cash offer is similar to the value the first proposal would have yielded. “It was decided to resort to a cash payment instead of a difficult financial model that creates confusion. The five cents represents the same actual cash value as the shares.” Read:
Orthotouch offers former HS investors only a few cents in the rand
Georgiou puts Orthotouch and Zephan into business rescue However, the rejection of the plan could result in the continuation of a myriad legal proceedings, which could take years to conclude. Nonetheless, it seems the plan will receive significant resistance from at least two factions representing various groups of investors. They are the Highveld Syndication Action Group (HSAG), led by attorney Jacques Theron, and a group of investors represented by Advocate Louis Bolt. Both were highly critical of the proposed rescue plan and advised investors to oppose the plan. Both said in response to Moneyweb questions that the new proposed plan offers investors only a pittance and is untransparent, due to the absence of audited financial statements. They also state that the adoption will result in the individuals responsible for repaying investors never being investigated or held accountable. These individuals include Hans Klopper (BRP of the HS companies and former director of Orthotouch), the Nic Georgiou Trust,  Michael Georgiou (CEO of the Accelerate Property Fund), and Connie Myburgh, a former director of Orthotouch. Delay in the publication of the rescue plan Despite the original business rescue process of Zephan and Orthotouch starting in March 2020, with the publication of the first rescue plan, it has taken nearly three years for Du Toit to produce a second. Creditors never voted on the first plan, as no creditors meeting was held due to Covid-19 restrictions. The process was also delayed by Du Toit seeking a declaratory order regarding the validity of buyback agreements Georgiou signed with HS21 and HS22 investors. However, the Pretoria High Court handed down a scathing judgement against Du Toit, which also questioned his impartiality and that said his actions suggest he acted “directly against the investors” in his application – a claim Du Toit denied. Read: Orthotouch, Zephan BRP ‘acting directly against HS investors’ – High Court Financial statements The absence of audited financial statements is a crucial concern, as it would reveal what transpired within Orthotouch and Zephan as it failed over the past 11 years. Zephan last published audited financial statements in 2009 and Orthotouch in 2015. The absence of these statements makes it impossible for a financial analysis of what happened with investors’ R4.6 billion, the sale of properties and the income and profits that the underlying properties yielded since 2011. The financial statements included in the rescue plan are rudimentary at best. It consists of only a few pages, with the balance sheet dated 30 September 2020 being prepared “from information given by the directors as of 31 July 2014.” There is no cash flow or income statement; only basic (undated) information about the income and expenses of the six remaining properties are disclosed. Du Toit already tasked auditors in 2020 to compile audited statements, but they could not do so during the past three years. In response to questions, Du Toit stated, “The auditor has presented draft interim reports up to 2019 which cannot be signed off as the opening balances in previous years are incorrect together with the liabilities and loan accounts which need to be corrected and obtained from group companies which financial are also out of date.” He added that financial statements since 2019 “will follow”. Ceding of claims Du Toit’s plan also states that if investors approve it, they will lose their right to further legal action against numerous individuals and companies in charge of the HS business rescue process. Connie Myburgh and Hans Klopper. Myburgh was a former director of Orthotouch and the current chairman of the Nova Property Group, the rescue vehicle of the Sharemax investment scheme. Klopper is the BRP of the HS companies, a former director of Orthotouch and the current head of business restructuring of BDO South Africa. Image compiled by Moneyweb The plan reads: “Upon adoption of the plan, all related claims of all creditors against the companies and others such as the HS Companies, the N Georgiou Trust, Nic Georgiou, Hans Klopper, Michael Georgiou, George Georgiou, Connie Myburg or any other person, natural or juristic, will be deemed to have been ceded and transferred to the proposer and will be incapable of enforcement by existing creditors.” Response from Bolt and Theron In response to questions, Bolt said he would advise investors to register their claims but to vote against the plan. “There are no financial statements, and we don’t know what happened to the properties’ income generated since 2011. We also question on what basis the liquidation scenario would yield only 1.9c in the rand and why investors should cede their claims to take legal action against Klopper and the other individuals. Why would this be included?” Advocate Louis Bolt. Image: Supplied Theron, representing the HSAG, says Du Toit failed to rescue the companies and “exacerbates the pensioners’ plight”. “Du Toit’s actions are unlawful and cause further financial prejudice to investors, with serious legal consequences. Over the past decade, the Highveld companies’ assets have drastically diminished from R4.6 billion to less than 5%.” Attorney Jacques Theron, legal representative of the HSAG. “The High Court has already found that Du Toit has not acted in the best interest of the investors, resulting in a punitive cost order against him. Furthermore, his business rescue plan prioritises the interests of certain persons and entities involved in the disappearance of billions of rands invested over a decade ago above those of the destitute investors. “The HSAG will continue to pursue legal actions against all those involved in these failed schemes.” The complexity of the registration process Moneyweb received numerous complaints regarding the complexity of the registration process. In response to questions, Du Toit said he has also received complaints but emphasised that they must be appropriately identified as they will have to vote to approve or reject the plan. “We are constantly simplifying the process to accommodate everyone by having a simplified form to register and the proof of claim documents to be filed later. We have a back office supporting queries and providing assistance. Each and every creditor needs to vote in person or proxy, but we need to have proof of life.” Properties sold before Orthotouch and Zephan were placed into business rescue. The business rescue plan refers to two claims against third parties which require further investigation. The first relates to a transaction through which Nic Georgiou, shortly before putting Zephan and Orthotouch into business rescue, sold properties for R95 million to Prinia but was not paid for them. Prinia is currently also in business rescue. Du Toit has already instituted a claim for R90 million with the Prinia BRP, but it was rejected. “My attorneys have formularised our formal claim, and we are demanding the noting of the claim as a contingent claim which they have to note, failing which we will use the remedies in law,” Du Toit said. The second relates to the listed entity, the Delta Property Fund. The total claim amounts to R210 million, but Du Toit only believes 5% or R10.5 million is recoverable. No details about this claim are available, and the claim has been dismissed twice. “There was an initial claim against Delta which was dismissed, and a second claim which was dismissed as well. On the second claim, I have now appointed new attorneys to reassess the claims and provide me with an opinion on rescinding the second dismissal if possible. This is currently sub judice as it occurred in February 2023,” Du Toit said.