JSE-listed banking group FirstRand has reported a double-digit growth in earnings, boosted by strong deposits and new business across its lending book fuelled by high interest rates benefitting South Africa’s banking sector. Read the full sens. The group delivered its interim results to the end of December 2022 on Tuesday, showing 15% growth in normalised earnings to R18 billion. This was driven by “continued momentum in new business origination in all of the large lending portfolios, excellent growth in deposits and a particularly strong showing by the group’s transactional franchise” the group said on Thursday. During the period, the group saw excellent growth in both deposits and advances, boosting income earned from interest, which increased 13% to R37.6 billion. In contrast, total group non-interest revenue increased 11% to R32.6 billion, helped by a 10% growth in fee and commission income, a 5% growth in trading income, and insurance income which soared 31%. Read: FirstRand’s RMB sets up office in New York Commenting on the results, group CEO, Alan Pullinger said: “These results reflect the strong operational performances from our customer-facing businesses, FNB, WesBank, RMB and Aldermore, and demonstrate the size and quality of FirstRand’s transactional and deposit franchises, continued momentum in lending, and a better credit outcome than expected.” The lender added that it remained “discerning in pursuing advances growth”, citing fierce competition in the banking industry and the current high-interest rate environment in South Africa brought on by the South African Reserve Bank’s (Sarb) fight against rampant inflation. “However, it’s pleasing to note that the advances growth that started in the second half of the year to June 2022 continued,” said FirstRand. At the same time, the deposit franchise and transactional balances increased strongly, both of which have provided an underpin to the superior return profile,” it said. Its biggest banking unit FNB, which increased active customers by 5% to 11.2 million during the reporting period, said profits rose 16% to R15.9 billion. Deposits during the period grew 11% to R810.9 billion while advances rose 8% to R507.1 billion. Overall transaction volumes increased by 15% to 1.8 billion transactions, FNB said. Read: The sneaky outlier outpacing SA’s banking stocks