<span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> You can also listen to this podcast on iono.fm here. CIARAN RYAN: Levels of government debt have steadily increased over the past decade, jumping substantially during the Covid-19 pandemic. The latest data shows that South Africa is sitting at a 67.4% debt-to-GDP ratio, and that’s expected to rise above 71% in the not-too-distant future, while the US is sitting at debt-to-GDP of 129%. Now that interest rates are increasing to combat higher inflation, the cost to cover these debts is also rising, making it increasingly difficult to see where government will get enough revenue to pay off these debts and invest for growth going forward. To explore this further, we are joined by Adriaan Pask, chief investment officer at PSG Wealth. Hi Adriaan, welcome back. Various fiscal challenges the South African government faces have been in the spotlight lately, with the recent budget speech and the State of the Nation Address by the president highlighting expenditure and revenue needs for the country. So, combining both of those, what have we learned about South Africa’s debt levels from these events? ADRIAAN PASK: Hi Ciaran, and hi to all the people listening in. I think it could be useful to first start off with the simple mechanics of debt, because this is going to help us in our discussion later on. But similar to a household or a business, whatever cannot be financed via income or taxes is typically financed through either your savings that you’ve accumulated or your reserves in the government’s case. All those expenses will have to be financed through debt. But the debt must ultimately be paid, and it can’t grow indefinitely. It’s typically a helpful tool to navigate through a crisis to create some cash flow, or for some bigger expenses, for example: so if you’re a manufacturer, for equipment, or if you’ve got a Covid situation like we had, then obviously the debt does help you to navigate that situation quite quickly. But, as I say, in the end you need to be able to either show an asset for it, like a household with finance for a property, for example. You at least have the asset that you can show for it, or there has to be some future income stream. That’s why the investment mandate for government is quite important. That is why government talks a lot about infrastructure, for example. That’s very good healthy spending, if you can get a decent return on your debt. But ultimately there is a risk involved, because what happens if you either don’t spend on infrastructure or if you don’t get a decent return on wherever your spending goes? Then obviously, as you mentioned in your introduction, when interest rates start to go up obviously the funding cost starts to go up again, very similar to a household that has to pay an increased bond repayment, for example. So with that in mind, it’s actually quite easy to see why debt has increased so much through the economic crisis, because more money was needed than was actually available. But time has moved on, and we are downstream from these crises, and now we need to start rethinking how we repay debts, and where the income stream and the growth are going to come from so that we can finance that debt. And, particularly important – similar to households again – is that the funding cost for government has also gone up as interest rates have gone up. That being said, we did have a very good debt-consolidation plan which has helped. That’s all the negotiations they had with the World Bank and the IMF (International Monetary Fund), for example, with consolidated debt at lower rates. Those things would have helped. But ultimately the debt situation through the crisis would have escalated, simply because we didn’t have enough money on hand. CIARAN RYAN: In the budget last month it was disclosed that debt-to-GDP is expected to rise above 71%. That sounds like a lot, but in global terms it’s actually not. However, we shouldn’t be too complacent about that. How does the South African debt compare to the rest of the world, and should we be worried about this? ADRIAAN PASK: I think South Africa is sitting, as you say, at roughly 67% debt-to-GDP and it’s set to increase slightly over the coming years. So debt is high. What is also problematic is that the growth component is muted, so we are under pressure there. And from the latest budget we can see that (government) forecasts gross debt stock to increase to just under R6 trillion by 2025/26 (from R4.73 trillion in 2022/23). And then the debt servicing cost that’s linked to that, which the government needs to pay, is roughly R400 billion annually over the next three years. These are massive expenses that the government needs to deal with. But the situation is by no stretch of the imagination unique to South Africa. Debt levels have been rising steadily across the world over the past decade, as you mentioned before. If you look at the United States, for example, (it’s) at 130%, the European Union at almost 90%, China around 80%, and Japan is also, I think, approaching closer to 300% already. So we can see our debt levels are high and putting us under pressure, but it’s definitely a global phenomenon. By those standards, we are actually still quite reasonable from a debt-to-GDP perspective. CIARAN RYAN: Are these figures worrying for you at PSG Wealth in terms of how you’re structuring your portfolios and planning investments? ADRIAAN PASK: Yes, in an increasing interest rate environment the funding cost to cover these debts is the most important part for where we are now. The debt really impacts us through those three avenues: households, corporates/business and government. So from a household perspective, I think although bond repayments and other debt repayments are going up with interest rates, generally we are still in better shape – especially globally (considering) that the savings rates escalated quite quickly. So from that perspective, things look maybe a little less dire than for some of the others, for example. But if you look at what the impact is on businesses or listed entities on the JSE, that’s where things start to get important from an investment perspective. The lower levels of disposable income that sit with the consumer will ultimately hit the top line of businesses. And as interest payments grow for those same businesses, obviously that starts to damage profit margins. That is not a good combination, ultimately, for earnings. We have already seen some businesses focus really heavily on expenses, especially on the offshore side. We’ve seen many of the tech companies, for example, (implementing) large-scale layoffs to try and manage expenses from that side and protect some of the profit margins. But we also see debt repayments becoming a new trend. Previously the debt funding was actually quite cheap. Interest rates were near zero, whereas now as they escalate the guys are backtracking a little bit on their share-repurchase programmes for example, because they could very easily use the free funding in the market to buy back their own shares. Where now that capital is not for free; in fact it’s quite expensive. So they’re abandoning share-repurchase programmes and rather electing to pay off some of the debt on the balance sheet. The market is generally not reacting positively to that, because the market generally likes share-repurchase programmes. But, that being said, at least if we start to focus on debt obviously the risks that come with over-indebtedness start to go away. From a government perspective we need to be careful because I think there’s a lot of mis-thinking around what they term ‘modern monetary theory’. That essentially says you can take on as much debt as you like, as long as you ultimately grow yourself out of your situation and repay the debt. The problem is that that is a quite a risky situation because what happens if the growth does not come? Then you essentially just build more and more debt. Some nations are now over-indebted, and we’ve become concerned that their growth will be insufficient to repay these debts in some cases. As I say, as rates have increased, bond yields have moved higher. At the same time the debt-funding cost is really ballooning for them. The US, for example, has already reached its debt ceiling, so it’s not allowed to incur any more debt, unless that debt ceiling is raised in June. Effectively what must happen for them is that that debt ceiling needs to be raised or increase, but ultimately they then incur more debt, to at least in part pay off some earlier debt, which is obviously not ideal. They are effectively using more expensive debt to pay off the cheaper debt. So that debt balloon or funding-cost component keeps on escalating in a very big way. With all of that in mind, the South African situation all of a sudden looks far less strained. I know we talk a lot about Eskom and our budgets and the lack of growth, but the situation elsewhere does look quite concerning. In South Africa’s case our debt-to-GDP is still relatively low, as I say. Economic growth is low, too low for job creation, for sure, and we should definitely improve, but it’s actually on par with international standards – hovering around 2%. But the real big positive for me in the South African case were some of the comments made by Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana in the budget speech, where he specifically mentioned that we need to use the proceeds that we receive out of our tax collections for investing into the future. I think that’s a good narrative, because previously a lot of the revenue collection just went to things that weren’t necessarily going to pay off in the future. We have a good portion of our taxes going to welfare, for example, and those things are needed for various other reasons. But at the same time you need to balance that against some investment into your future. Something else that he mentioned was that we need to start thinking in terms of trade-offs. You can’t just spend on everything. We need to start to budget more carefully, and there will always be trade-offs, which I also think speaks to good discipline. These are some of the basics of good budgeting that weren’t previously necessarily there. And then lastly you also mentioned (that) government non-interest spending will be kept below the level of revenue into the future, and at the same time (government) will try to target the stabilisation of debt. So (there were) some really good, positive comments (indicating) that they realise the situation is dire, and they want to get it under control, and the culture of overspending and hoping for the best in the future is going to be put on hold. (They) want to get to grips with the financial component. CIARAN RYAN: Just very quickly, Adriaan, you did mention there is such a thing as ‘good debt’ and ‘bad debt’. Maybe just quickly explain that. ADRIAAN PASK: I think good debt is something that you can use. Say, for example, manufacturers. There are many businesses out there that have large capital outlays where they can use the banking system to access funds to invest in their businesses, to ultimately grow them, create jobs, etc. In those cases debt is necessary. It’s a very useful tool. But when you incur debt to do other things that aren’t necessarily going to put you in a position to pay off that same original debt burden, that’s going to land you with a problem. Debt in itself is not a dangerous thing. I think it’s more a case of understanding the payoff for the debt that you incur. Is there anything coming back? Is there an asset that backs it? Etc. CIARAN RYAN: And finally, let’s just tie this back to the impact public debt has on investment. Why should investors be aware or concerned about the debt levels that they’re seeing? They might be quite alarmed, having listened to the last budget and figures that were thrown around, like Japan having debt-to-GDP of 300%, the United States 129%. Those do sound alarming. So what should they be concerned about? I’m talking about investors. ADRIAAN PASK: I think it’s going to be really important to understand how debt markets function, and also to evaluate businesses and governments on their spending patterns. How is that debt deployed? I think that should be an ongoing thing. But more immediately, I think, given the high level of debt that we already have, and simultaneously the higher interest rates, there will be governments that face funding bills or interest-rate bills that they haven’t previously faced, and (the problem of) how to navigate that. It’s similar to previous comments around trade-offs – where will the trade-offs be? If that money is now being utilised to pay off debt or fund the debt, where are the caps going to be? Who are the losers in that equation? I think it’s really important from an investment-research perspective to understand how that capital will move around. In the Japan case, for example, there are murmurs around significantly increasing corporate taxes to try and offset some of the additional expenses on the debt side of things, and that will have a material impact on corporate earnings. For government bonds I think it’s quite material, because for such a long time we’ve just accepted that, for example, US treasuries are a risk-free asset class. But all of a sudden we’ve got the US on a debt ceiling. That can’t be a risk-free asset. So how do you reprice that asset then for the risks involved? That’s a complicated job best left to investment professionals. You can look at the yield and say the yields are significantly better than they were 12 months ago, but how has the risk moved in line with that? Maybe the risks have actually moved up even more quickly. And then you’ve got to decide how you incorporate those two different sets in terms of opportunities and risks into the portfolio. CIARAN RYAN: We’re going to leave it there. That was Adriaan Pask, chief investment officer at PSG Wealth. Brought to you by PSG Wealth. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.