The inaugural IG Trading Summit, taking place at Langham’s Executive Conferencing venue on Saturday 11 March 2023, offers trading enthusiasts a rare opportunity to learn from the masters. “There’s a reason why so many new entrants to the market lose,” says Robert van Eyden, CEO of IG Markets SA. “This trading summit is an opportunity to learn from those who are trading successfully, and to rid people of the idea that trading is gambling. It isn’t.” Among the speakers is Kristia van Heerden, who started her career in journalism before discovering a passion for the markets. Her journey started with a mountain of debt. The financial freedom movement was picking up steam in the United States and a friend introduced her to the basic concepts of financial management through content generated by that movement. Over a three-year period, she managed to pay off all her debts and soon discovered the same discipline required to pay back debt is also hugely beneficial in savings and investments. Her journey inspired her to start a podcast, ‘The Fat Wallet Show’ (with Simon Brown from Just One Lap and MoneywebNOW’s host), about getting out of debt and into the markets. That podcast has been downloaded over a million times and has empowered listeners to take control of their finances, armed with the right knowledge. “The success of ‘The Fat Wallet Show’ opened a door for me to join IG in 2021 as education lead. My goal in this role is simple: improve client outcomes. For most traders, trading is an extension of their personal finances. It’s an environment where they can be closer to the markets while pursuing their goals of financial independence. I devote my days to try to ensure that those ambitious people have access to the tools they need when they need it. “As part of this role I have access to a huge amount of data – a crystal ball into client trading behaviour. The data shows being equipped with the right information isn’t sufficient preparation for a day in the markets. Our emotions get in our way when we trade – I recognise this in my own trading behaviour. “That means we need to find motivators outside of profit and we need to set up our environment to help us express the emotions that get stirred up in the markets without putting our trading at risk.” Van Heerden will be sharing insights from observing the behavioural data of thousands of traders across the world. She hopes to help traders understand that it’s possible to find small psychological wins long before being profitable. Other speakers Louise Bedford is founder of The Trading Game and a best-selling author of five books on the stock market. An Australian behavioural finance expert with degrees in psychology and business, she has been running a mentor programme since 2000 at www.tradinggame.com.au, where she also hosts a free weekly trading podcast. Dr Gizelle Willows is a professor at the University of Cape Town and MD of Nudging Financial Behaviour. She specialises in behavioural finance, particularly as it relates to personal finance and retirement savings, and will be giving a master class on adopting the right mindset for financial success. She is the recipient of multiple best paper awards and leader of the Behavioural Finance and Accounting international research group. Ross Larter is a former human resources manager for a mining company, who ran a small business, pastored a local church, and founded and ran a successful private school before turning his attention to financial markets. When a business acquaintance said “You’ve always taught different things to different people. Why don’t you teach them how to trade on the stock market?”, Larter took up the challenge. He taught himself to trade before starting Sure Trading, a stock market education company, in 2002. Trading isn’t a question of luck “The message we want to get across to people is that anyone with the willingness to learn can be successful in financial markets,” says Van Eyden. “It’s not a question of luck. It’s a question of having a trading plan, sticking to it, and developing risk mitigation strategies. Those attending this trading summit will find out that there is no magic bullet to financial market success. “All the speakers have their own unique approach to trading, but there are certain elements they hold in common – such as not over-committing on a single trade, taking losses quickly rather than letting them mount, and being patient when it comes to waiting for the right market set-up.” Also speaking at the summit is Shaun Murison, a market analyst with IG and a regular commentator on local financial markets in the media. “This summit will be a rare opportunity to hear from some truly exceptional traders, and understand what makes them successful,” says Murison. “Whether you’re new to trading or more experienced, these are lessons that are vital to anyone valuing financial freedom and trading success.” You can sign up for the summit here. IG Markets South Africa was established in 2010 and is regulated by the Financial Sector Conduct Authority (in South Africa) as an over-the-counter derivative provider and an authorised financial services provider (FSP No 41393). It has an office in Sandton to service its thousands of South African clients. Its board and senior management in South Africa consist of largely South Africans making it a truly South African operation. As one of the biggest employers in the online broking category, it is proud to be playing a leading role in the growing financial services industry in South Africa. CFD losses can exceed your deposits. Brought to you by IG Markets South Africa. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.