JSE-listed logistics group Grindrod is moving full steam ahead with plans to expand its route-to-market offering to its customers by building new facilities, implementing new routes and signing deals with logistics partners. The group communicated these plans to the market on Thursday in the release of its full-year financial results for the period ended 31 December 2022. In its efforts to offer an efficient solution for container volume between Durban and Johannesburg, Grindrod says it is establishing two new intermodal sites in Durban and implementing a long-haul transport offering from Gauteng to KwaZulu-Natal. To support graphite exports from Mozambique, the group says it will begin construction of an alternative route facility at the Pemba port. “Responding to container shortages, Grindrod supports an alternative route to market by shipping bagged graphite as breakbulk through Pemba. We have commenced construction of a facility in Pemba Port to support this solution,” it adds. Read:
Two major coal projects announced in one week
Grindrod flags expansions at Mozambique’s Port of Maputo
TNPA board backs R100bn expansion plan for KZN ports The company also revealed that it has partnered with chair and independent non-executive director of Grindrod Mcebisi Jonas’s company Ntiso Logistics, in tackling South African operations. Jonas, a former deputy finance minister of South Africa, founded Ntiso Investments Holdings, the parent company of Ntiso Logistics. Profit boost The group reported strong performance in its core operations – which include Port and Terminals, and Logistics – on the back of strong commodity markets, it said. Grindrod raked in R7.4 billion in revenue during the period, an increase of 58% on the prior period. Read: Xolani Mbambo appointed as new Grindrod CEO Headline earnings came in 37% stronger at R1.05 billion, while Ebitda (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation) grew 32% to R2.17 billion. Core operations generated R1.68 billion in cash from operations, 62% stronger than the previous period. Grindrod declared a total dividend of 95.3 cents, up from the 20.1 cents declared a year prior. The group’s Port and Terminals segment processed record volumes at its Mozambique facilities, with the Matola terminal handling over eight million tonnes and the Maputo coal terminal growing its volumes fivefold to 3.2 million tonnes in the period. “Grindrod delivered good results in its core business for the year ended 31 December 2022,” it said. “Volume growth due to strong mining minerals markets and strategic focus on customer solutions drove this performance in both the Port and Terminals, and Logistics business segments.” “We are relentless in remaining relevant to our existing customer base and attractive to new customers looking for the most efficient and cost-effective route to market,” Grindrod CEO Xolani Mbambo said in a statement. Read:
Coal giants are making mega profits as climate crisis grips the world
Automotive, break-bulk sectors at record volumes: Transnet Port Terminals
Mozambique’s vast gas fields will fuel growth, says Grindrod