Life insurance firm Momentum Metropolitan’s interim profits soared 45% for the period to December 2022, as death claims returned to levels last seen in 2019, before the Covid-19 pandemic surfaced. Read the Sens announcement. The insurance group said headline earnings per share for the six months grew to 1 134.2 cents per share, while normalised headline earnings surged 46% to R2.2 billion. Its profits were also positively impacted by the company releasing some of the provisions it had made for Covid-19-related claims, Momentum said on Wednesday. Operating profit more than doubled to R1.9 billion, from R895 million during the previous period. “This result was supported by the improved mortality experience, coupled with an improvement in investment variances. All business units, except for Momentum Investments and Non-life Insurance, grew operating earnings,” it said. Read: No new spikes in deaths in 2022, insurance claims return to pre-Covid levels “We are grateful to see the easing of Covid-19-related death claims and the positive mortality-experience variances in our main life insurance businesses. This indicates that the Covid-19 pandemic has reached its endemic phase,” said Momentum CEO Hillie Meyer. Despite its pleasing set of results, Meyer noted that new business volumes in some of the company’s units performed below expectations, which translated to lower than expected new clients. This was “mainly as a result of the prevailing economic headwinds and lack of growth in the industry.” Meyer said. The company’s core Momentum Life division contributed the most to the company’s interim performance, which saw growth in normalised headline earnings to R689 million from a previous R30 million. The Momentum Corporate unit increased normalised headline earnings to R556 million from R370 million, which includes growth of 64% in operating profit to R494 million, Momentum said. Its short-term insurer Guardrisk saw an increase of 18% in normalised headline earnings, while that of Momentum Health rose 55% to R146 million. Read: Guardrisk ordered to pay Ferrari owner R1.82m “The Health business’s good membership growth of 3%, despite a tough economic environment, was mainly attributable to the continued growth in the public sector and Health4Me divisions,” the company said. However, with South African consumers shouldering an increasing financial burden, new business volumes are expected to be under pressure. “While our earnings outlook has improved over the past eighteen months, recent pressure on sales volumes indicate that South Africans’ disposable income remains under pressure due to rising interest rates, high inflation and the lack of economic growth in South Africa. This is likely to put ongoing affordability pressure on new business volumes,” Meyer said.