More than 90% of commercial property owners believe load shedding will worsen in future. This is according to a survey conducted this month by the SA Property Owners’ Association (Sapoa) of its members, which also showed the devastating impact that load shedding is having on the commercial property sector. It said load shedding is having a very serious impact on 28.81% of commercial property landlords and affecting the viability and sustainability of these businesses. A further 40.07% of commercial property owners reported that load shedding is having a “serious impact” on their businesses and 25.42% that it is having a “moderate impact”. Only 1.69% Sapoa members responded that load shedding has “no impact” on their businesses. Further, more than 90% of commercial property owners surveyed believe load shedding will worsen in future. The negative impact of load shedding on commercial property landlords comes at a time when most are still trying to recover from the serious knock they took from the Covid-19 pandemic, when the demand for and take up of commercial property space dwindled because of changes in the work environment, particularly the shift to remote work or flexible working arrangements. The survey results also revealed the significant additional estimated costs landlords were confronted with that are associated with load shedding. Sapoa said 8.93% of respondents reported that it is costing their businesses more than R10 million monthly in direct costs, such as additional fuel costs to run generators. Estimated direct load shedding costs per month. Source: Sapoa More than 83% of the businesses indicated they had diesel generators and 49.15% that they had solar energy solutions to combat load shedding, suggesting that many businesses have both diesel generators and solar solutions. Indirect costs adding up The impact of load shedding is also resulting in significant indirect costs, such as lost labour productivity and damage to machinery. Estimated indirect load shedding costs per month. Source: Sapoa Load shedding is also impacting the general service delivery of businesses, with: The survey found 61.18% of the businesses reported having load shedding daily and 34.12% experienced load shedding a few times a week. In 2022, the vast majority of these businesses (84.71%) experienced load shedding for between two and four hours, with 10.89% impacted for between five and eight hours and 4.71% for less than two hours. Respondents had a number of suggestions on how to alleviate the current load shedding, including that: Estienne de Klerk, CEO of Growthpoint Properties South Africa, told Moneyweb’s Fifi Peters, on the SAfm Market Update with Moneyweb last month that the company has about 5.5 million square metres of space within its retail portfolio of more than 40 properties, an office portfolio of about 190 properties and an industrial portfolio of a similar size. Listen/read: Here’s how much Growthpoint is spending to keep the lights on De Klerk said that to keep the total portfolio operating, Growthpoint has 13.5MW of solar plus 332MW of generation installed. He said this excludes the V&A Waterfront, which currently has 2MW of solar installed – which is planned to be increased to 4MW – as well as 48 generators that generate almost 24MW. “That initial investment clearly is for us as Growthpoint – or for the Victoria and Alfred Waterfront in that specific case. “Ultimately that is built into the rental generally. We try to share the cost in respect of the actual ongoing utilisation with our tenants, where possible. “We are generally recovering only about 60% of the cost and, in most of our retail portfolio we don’t recover any of it. “Ultimately the shareholders of Growthpoint bear the cost,” he said.