The South African government’s stance on Russia, which invaded Ukraine over a year ago, must not have an adverse impact on the role of financial institutions, Standard Bank CEO, Sim Tshabalala said. He said it is imperative that South Africa positions itself appropriately in global affairs. Read: Standard Bank reaches highest profits ever “We think that the position taken by the South African government, at the moment, is one of neutrality, one can have moral and political views about that, our view is that whatever position they take it must not have an adverse impact on our role as a financial institution,” Tshabalala said on Thursday. His comments follow those of FirstRand CEO Alan Pullinger, who last week warned that the South African government’s close ties with Russia were extreme, adding that they present geopolitical risks. Read:
FirstRand CEO slams SA’s ‘foolhardy’ ties with Russia
Bank bosses and their national conversation responsibilities Pullinger criticised the government’s “enthusiasm” for Russia, warning that it was attracting attention from countries that are “vehemently” opposed to Russia’s war in Ukraine and added that South Africa could not afford to compromise its access to international markets. “We will say what needs to be said in respect of the need for financial institutions to be able to intermediate capital on the continent and globally, and to the extent that policies have a negative impact on that, we will have our say,” Tshabalala said. Despite the South African government stating that it remains neutral, it has drawn criticism for engaging in joint military exercises with Russia and China, a move that has been seen to endorse Russia’s invasion. South Africa also previously abstained from a United Nations vote in condemnation of Russia’s war. Read: US backs EU pressure on SA to take stance on Russia “All wars are abhorrent, they are abhorrent both from a moral perspective and also from a human rights perspective, and therefore … condemn violence, particularly in Russia, and we will do the same in respect of what is happening in Afghanistan,” Tshabalala said. “The same voice should be as loud in relation to Russia and Ukraine as all other issues of conflict.”