South African food manufacturer RCL Foods has opted not to declare its interim dividend for the six months period to December 2022 as record levels of load shedding and high commodity input costs place the group’s volumes and margins under pressure. The JSE-listed group which produces well-known food brands including Rainbow Chicken, Selati sugar, Sunbake bread and Nola mayonnaise, informed investors of its performance via Sens on Monday. The group reported a 22.4% decline in headline earnings per share (Heps) to 56.4 cents while earnings per share (EPS) declined by 22% to 57.5 cents this period, in line with the group’s previous guidance. Earnings before depreciation, amortisation and impairment (Ebitda) declined by 9.2% to R1.18 billion for the period. According to the food manufacturer, the reduced performance during this period is due mainly to declines in the Rainbow Chicken business as well as its baking operations. However, higher selling prices coupled with greater volumes in the Sugar, Rainbow and Vector Logistics business have supported a 17.6% rise in group revenue for the half year to R20.2 billion. “Focusing on the factors we can control in current conditions, we have sought to deliver a stable rand profit and grow market share while supporting cash-strapped consumers as far as possible, both through value innovations and responsibly managed price increases,” CEO Paul Cruickshank said in a statement. “In so doing, our concern has been to balance the need for margin protection with the pressure on consumers’ pockets,” he added. Read: SA poultry edges closer to being a R60bn industry AVI interims JSE-listed branded consumer products company AVI has reported a slightly better performance than market competitor RCL Foods, despite experiencing similar operational challenges during the period. According to the group, increased levels of load shedding have cost the business R22 million in direct operating costs, while the indirect costs continue to climb. Placing further pressure on operations is a slump in consumer demand brought on by higher inflation, rising interest rates and SA’s high unemployment rate. AVI posted a 0.6% rise in headline earnings per share (Heps) to 318.9 cents. The group’s operating profit this period was dented by seafood brand I&J’s drop in performance, with the group only growing by 1.7% to R1.54 billion. Excluding the declines in the I&J business, the group’s operating profits grew by 8.4%. “I&J was impacted by higher fuel prices, reduced quota and unfavourable abalone sales mix due to the Chinese lockdown,” the group said. For AVI, increased selling prices across its categories have offset some of the input cost pressures the group experienced during the half year, boosting group revenue by 7.2% to R7.82 billion. AVI declared an interim dividend of 172 cents per share, up by 1.2% from the previous period. Read: Soaring cost of chips drives up Shisa Nyama Index Outlook Both RCL Foods and AVI expect their businesses to remain resilient and improve performance in the next half of the year despite the outlook for the local operating environment not being expected to ease up anytime soon. “We have delivered a resilient set of results in an exceptionally tough market. We are committed to maintaining a relentless focus on the factors within our control to keep moving forward in line with our strategic growth agenda, guided by our unfolding Purpose and Sustainability journey,” RCL Foods’ Cruickshank said. “Balancing price and volumes will be a challenge in the context of aggressive competitor activity, constrained consumers, and the need to ameliorate higher input costs,” AVI said. “Our focus on cost management remains a key underpin to protecting margins with benefits expected from factory efficiencies and procurement savings. Profit growth in many of our categories will be dependent on our ability to increase volumes and raise selling prices,” AVI added.