JSE-listed food, clothing and homeware retailer Woolworths has recorded its highest interim earnings ever for the 26 weeks ended December 2022, the group said in a Sens statement on Wednesday. Earnings per share this period (EPS) were 74.9% higher at 293.7 cents, while adjusted headline earnings per share (Heps) grew by 75.5% to 284.7 cents during the half year. “I’m very pleased with the results we’ve achieved for the period – the highest interim earnings in the history of the group! “This is a testament to the collective focus and dedication of our teams in executing our strategies,” group CEO Roy Bagattini said. According to the group, its latest half-year financials represent its “strongest balance sheet” in the last ten years and its most “robust capital allocation”, boosting the group’s liquidity. Woolworths reported a 16.3% turnover and concession sales growth to R49.9 billion during this period. A focus on managing working capital and capex prioritisation has supported cash conversion that exceeded 90%, which has helped the group generate a healthy cash flow of 269 cents per share, 29.3% stronger than that reported in 2021. Interim dividends for the period more than doubled to 158.5 cents per share, up from the 80.5 cents posted last year, representing a 96.9% growth. “We are building a bigger, better and far stronger business. Whilst we’ve already begun to reset the financial credentials of our group, I firmly believe our best years are still to come,” Bagattini added. Load shedding Despite the group’s record-breaking performance this period, load shedding continues to be a headache for the food retailer. In its statement reviewing performance for the last 26 weeks of 2022, Woolworths noted that the country’s heightened power cuts have stolen a total of R90 million from its local operating profits. This represents a proportion of R15 million per month, with the group’s food business suffering the most due to higher-than-usual waste levels and diesel costs. “Given the erratic and unpredictable nature of load shedding, we are focused on developing a longer-term business solution to sustainably mitigate both upstream and downstream impacts to this challenge,” Woolworths said in a statement. “This includes the impacts on our suppliers, and particularly those where the costs required to manage the breakdown in infrastructure have become prohibitive.” According to the group, excessive blackouts have seen the food business having to stomach an 8.5% growth in expenses compared to last year, due to increased spending on diesel and higher cost inflation. As a result, Woolworths Food saw a decline in the operating margin this period to 6.7%, from 7.2% in the previous period. “Excluding the impact of load shedding, adjusted operating profit growth on the prior period was 490bps higher, at 5.1%, with operating margin 30bps higher, at 7.0%,” the group said. Read: Shoprite staring down a R1bn-plus annual diesel bill Outlook Looking forward to the rest of the financial year, Woolworths believes the next half will prove challenging for the group. This as the group anticipates numerous headwinds stemming from higher inflation and interest rates which may continue well into the period. In relation to the impact of load shedding, the group has criticised government’s attempts of trying to resolve the energy crisis as being “remote”. This after government in the national state of disaster regulations – which were released on Tuesday – provided protections to food production and food storage facilities. Unlike retailers, food producers were classified in the regulations as critical infrastructure, alongside health, water, rail and port infrastructure and critical electronic communications and broadcasting infrastructure. “In South Africa, an imminent resolution to the debilitating power crisis and stimulus for economic growth appears remote. “These factors, coupled with a higher comparative base effect, are likely to result in slower profit growth (from continued operations) in the current half, relative to the first half.” Read:
A load-shedding-induced price war looms, and PnP stands to lose
Could Woolworths’s fashion turnaround strategy finally be taking shape?