More important than cultivating a habit of savings is establishing a reason to save – in other words, defining your life’s goals, says Thami Cele, head of savings and investment at Absa. “The big mistake a lot of people make is to believe they need a big lump sum before starting to save. That’s not true. If all you have is R50, start with that. Once you start developing the habit of saving, it becomes easier, and you’ll be able to save larger and larger amounts.” The majority of South Africans are living pay cheque to pay cheque. They may end up borrowing from unregistered credit providers to make it to the end of the month. “Developing a culture of savings is not easy for people who are barely making it through the month,” says Cele. “For savings to make sense, you have to define your financial goals. In other words, what are you saving for? A lot of people avoid having to confront planning too far into the future, because it takes discipline and control over spending habits – and, crucially, it means looking into your spending habits and finding room for saving. This is something that should be taught in schools.” The type of goals for saving will vary depending on the person and the age. A young newly employed 20-something-year-old will be more interested in saving for an overseas trip than retirement. Those starting a family will want to put money aside for the child’s education or health care. Those in their 40s and 50s should start to be concerned about having enough to retire comfortably. The first step in cultivating good savings habits is to start, adds Cele. It doesn’t matter how much, just as long as a start is made, and it takes just minutes to open a tax-free savings account or any other Savings and Investments account – through the Absa Banking App or Absa Online. For a tax-free savings account, the total annual contribution in any tax year may not exceed R36 000, nor the lifetime contribution of R500 000. “Once you have opened an account, whether it is a tax-free savings or capital guarantee account, you will now start looking at your life goals and the reasons for saving,” says Cele. “Those who find it difficult to save should start by looking at their bank statements and see where there are expenses that can be cut or reduced, and in this way make room for savings.” Who is eligible for a tax-free savings account? Any South African, regardless of age, qualifies to open a tax-free savings account. Minors will need parental consent to open an account, though Cele says this is becoming increasingly common in SA as parents try to pass on good savings habits to their children. Any advice for would-be savers at the start of the new tax year? “Pay yourself first,” says Cele as a general approach to saving. “Put 10% of your monthly earnings into a savings account, and if you can’t afford this, work up to it – by starting with however little you can afford. This is how you build sound savings habits. “To make room for savings capacity consider reviewing your spending and see how you can make use of the R36 000 a year tax-free savings allowance. Use this allowance as a target for your savings. “One of the advantages of digital spending is that it leaves a footprint which allows you to measure and analyse your spending. Cash disappears quickly and in most cases, we are not able to fully trace where we actually spent the money.” It’s just as important to nurse your credit score, as this opens doors to funding for big ticket purchases such as houses and vehicles. “Protect yourself through insurance, pay debts on time, save for emergencies, and build up a reserve cushion that can carry you for at least three months. “Saving has to be intentional and it must be fun. Build good habits yourself and then pass these on to the next generation.” To help build better savings habits, monthly transfers into tax-free savings accounts can be automated by debit order. Where’s a good place to start for those with little to save? For short term and emergency savings, Absa’s TruSave requires as little as R50 to open an account, has no monthly admin fees and gives you immediate access to your money. Not only do you get interest, but you also get boosted interest (i.e. the Digital Bonus Rate) if the account is opened digitally. And with free Absa Rewards, there is more value for money for our customers – another motivation to start as soon as you can. For long-term saving and investing, the Absa tax-free savings account requires an opening deposit of R1 000, with contributions of up to R36 000 a year. No tax is paid on interest earned. You get immediate access to your money and can earn additional interest through the Absa digital bonus rate. And for larger amounts? The Absa Cash Invest Tracker account requires a minimum of R100 000, with no monthly management fees. Capital is guaranteed, just like all our savings accounts, and you can borrow using the funds as security. This account currently offers a return of between 7.9% and 8.05% a year, which is superior to many money market fund returns – if not all. Brought to you by Absa Relationship Banking. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.