Repeating the stark statistics of how few people can retire comfortably – less than 7% – and even seeing the elderly struggling to afford necessities seems to do little to motivate people to save and invest for retirement. Or they do it half-heartedly, without thinking carefully about what they need and without a proper plan to get there. “For most young people, retirement is a vague concept too far in the future to worry about today,” says Kelin Pottier, product development specialist at 10X Investments. “Others are too busy trying to make ends meet from day-to-day to save for retirement. Even those who do contribute to a retirement fund tend to do so without considering if it is enough. “In addition, most people are too focused on daily news and worry about things they have little control over. Angst and stress about things such as the interest rates in the US, greylisting or the rand will achieve nothing. “The retirement industry has thousands of options, but too few solutions,” says Pottier. “Yet saving for retirement is actually quite simple.” He says 10X Investments believes in keeping things simple and focusing on what matters most. “Invest 15% of your salary for 40 years, in a high growth fund and keep fees low. “Anybody can benefit from this winning strategy and can retire with enough money. We’ve back-tested it over more than 100 years and anyone who had followed it, at any time since 1900, would have retired with enough money,” says Pottier. Attitude For the last five years, 10X Investments has done research to see how South Africans prepare for their retirement. The research is published each year in the 10X Investments Retirement Reality Report. Unfortunately, the figures show that the vast majority of people don’t have a retirement plan at all. “The consistency of outcomes gives more credence that the numbers are as bad as surveys suggest,” says Pottier. “The bottom line from the most recent report [last year’s], is that 68% of people surveyed say they have no retirement savings plan at all, or just a vague idea of one. “That translates into a lot of people who will probably be forced to rely on family and friends, or to try to eke out a living on South Africa’s old age grant [state pension] of only R1 980 per month. “Reports have shown that the outlook is worsening by most measures as South Africans focus their attention on overcoming more immediate financial pressures, brought on by the pandemic containment measures, rising prices and interest rates, and a precarious job market. “People focus only on their near-term circumstances, which are largely outside their control, and are ignoring the long term – where minor changes can deliver huge returns down the line.” A minor change that’s important One minor, very important change would be to look at the fees and other costs when saving for retirement. A major problem in the investment industry is that people face layers of fees. Advisor and platform fees, administration fees and fund management fees are charged at different levels, which could add up to exorbitant fees of 3% to 4% per annum on the value of the investment. “People should look at fees, ask the right questions and negotiate. Saving just 1% in fees over the long term can add 30% to the capital at the end of the 40 years,” says Pottier. Once in retirement and living off the returns from your capital, every saving in fees makes a meaningful difference to your income. “In the example of a retiree drawing 5% from their capital, saving 1% in fees makes a 20% difference to [their] monthly income. It could mean the difference between a carefree retirement and outliving your capital.” 10X Investments says people need to think about retirement and calculate how much income they would need in retirement and determine how much they need in retirement savings to provide the income every month. The firm recommends that people should have enough capital to replace 60% to 75% of the income they receive while working. Pottier says the correct replacement ratio figure varies by personal circumstances but is based on the assumption that people should have lower monthly expenses when retiring. “In most cases, people would have little debt at that stage of their lives. The house and car should be paid off, and hopefully other debts too. The cost of children’s education may no longer be a factor. You also don’t have the costs of commuting to work every day and the associated costs of going to work every day. “A big part of the lower monthly expenditure is that you stop saving for retirement – the 15% of your monthly income that you were putting away every month. Now your retirement savings start paying you back,” says Pottier. A financial calculator on the 10X Investments website shows that a person earning pre-tax income of R30 000 per month should have approximately R4 million in retirement savings to be able to replace 75% of their monthly salary in retirement. “People should realise that saving for retirement is a long-term endeavour. The secret is to invest in a suitable high-yielding investment, paying low fees. Retirement itself is also a long-term game of 20 or 30 years, and the same principles of choosing the right investment portfolio for your time horizon, setting a sustainable income drawdown and keeping fees low apply. “It is very important that people take control of their finances, plan and save for retirement and check their progress and fees annually,” says Pottier. Brought to you by 10X Investments. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.