Financial services firm Nedbank has declared the highest dividend in its history, after reporting strong revenue growth during its 2022 financial year. Read the full Sens announcement. The group declared a final dividend of 866 cents per share for the year ended in December 2022, up by 14% from 758 cents per share previously. The declared dividend brings the total dividend distribution to shareholders to 1 649 cents per share for the full 2022 year. This represents a 38% increase from the previous year, which is also at record-high levels, the bank said. The lender also announced plans to return excess cash to shareholders via a R5 billion capital optimisation initiative that it intends to carry out over a year, which has received the green light from the board. Commenting about the plans in the results announcement, Nedbank CEO Mike Brown said all the group’s business units have reported pleasing earnings growth and higher returns on equity (ROEs), necessitating the initiative. “A strong balance sheet and excess levels of capital enabled the group to declare a record-high final dividend as well as announce a R5 billion capital optimisation initiative, subject to regulatory approvals, to be executed over 12 months through both a share repurchase and an odd-lot offer,” Brown said. Read:
Nedbank still seeing ‘pent-up demand’ for credit
Nedbank says SA likely entered recession in Q4 of 2022 During the reporting period, Nedbank reported a jump of 20% in headline earnings, increasing to R14 billion, while its ROE climbed 14%, from 12.5% previously. “The headline earnings increase was supported by double-digit revenue growth, a slightly higher credit loss ratio (CLR) at 89 bps… and a well-managed expense base,” the bank said. Like peers in the lending sector, banks are benefiting from the endowment effect of higher interest rates, which is boosting bank earnings and resulting in higher income earned from interest. Nedbank itself saw an increase of 12% in interest income to R36.2 billion, as loan advances to clients grew 7% compared with what the group reported during its interim results. On the other hand, non-interest income also saw a double-digit increase, climbing 10% to R27.3 billion. “Capital and liquidity ratios increased to multi-year highs, with a common equity tier 1 ratio of 14,0%, an average fourth-quarter liquidity coverage ratio of 161%” the bank said. Despite South Africa experiencing GDP growth of 2.3% over first three quarters of 2022, Brown lamented the concoction of ills currently threatening the economy, such as the load shedding crisis, crumbling water, transport and logistics infrastructure, poor delivery at a municipal level and high levels of crime and corruption. “These are critical foundations required for business confidence, sustainable investment, higher economic growth, and job creation as well as fiscal sustainability, and more urgent action is needed,” Brown said. “Progress on structural reforms to address these matters has been far too slow, and the will of the political and public sector, to make meaningful changes, is uneven and actual delivery is poor,” he said.