The outstanding feature of Sanlam’s results for the year to end December 2022 was not only its record performance, but management indicating that the insurance and asset management group could perform even better in the years ahead. Sanlam CEO Paul Hanratty told the investment community in a presentation of the results that management anticipates that the global economy will start to recover soon, and that the group is well placed to perform strongly when this recovery takes place. Read: Sanlam’s financial services performance hits a ‘historic high’ Sanlam is also finalising several large strategic acquisitions and joint ventures to benefit the group in the future. “Although the global economic conditions, high inflation and volatile markets are still a concern at the start of 2023, we do anticipate a global recovery in late 2023 or 2024,” says Hanratty. “The group expects the consumer environment to remain challenging. However, historically, personal disposable income growth has usually exceeded inflation, especially once wage demands lift in response to higher prices. Read: Momentum CEO sees SA’s economic pain putting a strain on new business “The group therefore expects personal disposable incomes as well as insurance premiums to adjust to higher rates of inflation. Clients are therefore likely to restore levels of cover which will support premium growth in the medium term.” Corrective steps Sanlam also took corrective actions to counter the string of unprecedented challenges that plagued the world, and insurance companies, over the last few years. Since 2021, Sanlam has had to deal with the Covid-19 pandemic, unprecedented business interruption claims, weather catastrophes, extreme market volatility, the Russia/Ukraine conflict, a surge in inflation, and climate change challenges. The damages were huge. During the last three years, Sanlam paid life insurance claims to the value of R4.6 billion higher than normal due to excess mortality, and through its short term insurer Santam business interruption claims of R4.7 billion and another R4.4 billion as a result of the floods in KwaZulu-Natal. Read: Floods and car claims hit Santam While nobody can predict what will happen over the next few years, it is nevertheless reassuring that this set of events is behind Sanlam – events it describes as occurring once in 25 or 100 years. For instance, the value of total death claims decreased from nearly R22 billion in 2021 to R16.5 billion in 2022. Abigail Mukhuba, Sanlam’s chief financial officer, told Moneyweb that corrective steps included the repricing of risks and that both the life insurance and shirt term insurance businesses adjusted premiums to compensate for higher risks. This restored reserves in the life insurance operations, which should position Sanlam for adverse events that might affect mortality in the future. Santam also repriced its risks and reduced cover in instances where it deemed risks would be unacceptable, such as insuring against damage caused by load shedding. Makhuba says the effect of the corrective steps is becoming apparent, as can be seen in the improvement in most of the divisions in the group. Sanlam expects these improvements to continue in 2023. Hanratty warns that the general economic uncertainty, and the impact it has on market volatility, remains the largest variable in the outlook for 2023. “The positive start to the year bodes well for our performance, but we remain susceptible to any weakness in these markets,” he says. Mukhuba mentions that life returning to normal after the Covid-19 pandemic and the increase in living costs brought some changes. “During the financial year, we caught the tail end of higher savings due to people spending less money during the pandemic. People spent less and saved more. “Back to work, more travelling and going on holiday result in people spending more. We have seen a decrease in lump sum investments. “Recent increases in interest rates have also reduced investment in investment products as bank deposits offered good returns,” says Mukhuba, adding that the flow into the investment management businesses is back to normal levels after a boom period. New investments Sanlam is looking forward to the benefits promised by several large acquisitions, mergers and joint ventures. A note to the annual results discloses that the integration of Absa Asset Management only started recently, after the acquisition of this business in October 2021. Merging the business with Sanlam increases Sanlam’s assets under management to more than R1 trillion. Sanlam also established the largest wills and trusts business by increasing its interest in Capital Legacy (still subject to regulatory approval). Read: Sanlam invests R1.1bn to boost retail life insurance Also still subject to approvals by the relevant authorities is the joint venture with Allianz Group, the world’s largest insurer, which will establish the largest insurance group on the African continent outside of SA. Listen/Read: Brightrock hits R4.3bn in total life insurance payouts Sanlam expects approvals for the Allianz joint venture and the AfroCentric, BrightRock and Capital Legacy transactions to be received within months, and to conclude the transactions towards the middle of the year. The joint venture with MTN, which will give Sanlam access to MTN’s large and growing client base across Africa, is also big. Acquisitions in India are putting Sanlam in the lead there too. “The Absa and Alexforbes transactions which were completed in 2022 and 2023 are expected to contribute positively to the Group’s earnings in 2023,” says Hanratty. “Sanlam is in an exceptionally strong position competitively and financially as we begin 2023. Following a period of turbulence in the environment and corporate activity aimed at repositioning the group, we are in a position to capitalise on any recovery in the environment,” he says. Shareholders Shareholders will benefit over the longer term. Apart from the 8% increase in the annual dividend to R3.60 per share, Sanlam is considering another share buyback that would return as much as R1 billion to shareholders. Hanratty only mentioned that Sanlam is able to return a “small amount of excess capital” to shareholders. Mukhuba was more forthcoming: “We currently have discretionary capital of around R5 billion, of which we want to keep between R2 billion and R3 billion,” she says. “We can distribute another R1 billion, probably also by way of a share buyback. Last year we bought back R1 billion worth of shares.” While Sanlam’s policies also make provision for a special dividend, Makhuba says that a share buyback benefits shareholders over the long term, rather than a short term gain as the case is with a special dividend. “We prefer to keep our long-term shareholders happy,” she says. Listen to Fifi Peters and Sanlam Investments CEO Nersan Naidoo discussing the investment business merger between Sanlam and Absa:  You can also listen to this podcast on iono.fm here.