Embattled power utility Eskom was forced to postpone its latest load shedding media briefing on Monday afternoon after Eskom bosses were summoned to an emergency meeting with President Cyril Ramaphosa. Eskom announced its decision to postpone the briefing – meant to update the nation on the state of its systems – a little over an hour before it was scheduled to take place. Read: Intense power outages are most worrying yet, Absa says “Unfortunately, Eskom has had to postpone this afternoon’s media briefing due to emergency engagements with the President,” said Eskom spokesperson Sikonathi Mantshantsha in a message to the media. “While we aim to hold the media briefing as soon as possible, the date and time can only be confirmed once meetings with the president are concluded.” The emergency meeting is another clear indication of the worsening power crisis in the country, with five straight days of Stage 6 load shedding. This, as the economy is not fully opened up, with some businesses, schools and universities yet to fully reopen for the 2023 business year. At Stage 6, consumers and businesses without backup power have to endure up to 10 hours of load shedding a day. The postponement of Eskom’s latest media briefing comes after the president cancelled his plans to travel to Switzerland this week for the World Economic Forum (WEF) gathering in Davos. Ramaphosa took the decision to stay behind to deal with the country’s worsening energy crisis. The power utility said on Monday that it will offer an update on load shedding at a later stage. “Eskom will in the meantime publish a power alert with regards to the stages of load shedding.” Some ‘good’ news In a power alert issued later on Monday afternoon Eskom said the intensity of power cuts will be reduced from Tuesday – to Stage 4 from 05:00 and 16:00, and Stage 5 from 16:00 to 05:00. It said it expects 14 generators to return to service during the week and that it managed to procure another 50 million litres of diesel in the first week of January, helping to ease the pressure on its generating systems. “Eskom cautions the public, however, that there is a high degree of uncertainty associated with this and that these changes will only be possible in their entirety if the units return to service as planned,” it said. “Changes in the stages of load shedding can therefore occur at short notice, due to the inherent unreliability of the coal power station fleet. “Eskom procured an additional 50 million litres of diesel on 06 January 2023. This fuel will be utilised sparingly to manage the pumped storage dam levels and to limit the amount of load shedding during the day. Together, these emergency generators contribute 5 700MW of capacity.” Power stations Kendal, Majuba and Tutuka all saw at least one generating unit return to service on Monday, with a remaining 12 generating units – amounting to 5 804MW of capacity – offline for planned maintenance. A further 16 173MW of generating capacity remains offline due to unit breakdowns.