JSE-listed gas producer Renergen on Monday announced that it has produced its first liquid helium at its Free State-based commercial liquid natural gas plant, known as the Virginia Gas Project. The announcement comes just over a month since the producer started delivering South Africa’s first domestically-produced, commercial liquefied natural gas (LNG). Read: Renergen starts delivering SA’s first locally produced commercial LNG (Dec 2022) In a Sens statement Renergen noted that the helium module is now operational and being optimised. “Having the helium plant in operation and producing liquid helium is a truly spectacular achievement by the team who went above and beyond to achieve the major and critical milestone,” adds Renergen CEO Stefano Marani. “All components of the Phase 1 plant are now in operation, and South Africa joins the ranks of only 8 countries in the world to produce this rare and valuable liquid.” The company says its plant will also be the first to host liquid helium processing technology in the country. By the JSE’s close on Monday, Renergen share price was up over 9%, at R27 a share. Read: Renergen switches on its Virginia Gas Project (Sep 2022) Marani tells Moneyweb that the liquid helium has been earmarked for global exports. “The liquid helium module is reserved only for exports. That is because South Africa only uses about 200 kilograms of helium per day, whereas the United States consumes 35 000kg of helium, on average, per day,” he adds. He says Renergen’s liquid helium module can produce 350kg per day, a 150kg more than what South Africa currently consumes. “Until South Africa develops fibre optic cables and high-end tech businesses, we are not going to be able to consume that amount of helium,” adds Marani. Commenting on the gas producer’s trajectory, Small Talk Daily analyst, Anthony Clark, tells Moneyweb that while the company’s shares were up by 29% at the start of 2022, its stocks plunged 29% towards the end of the year due to the market’s disenchantment from ongoing delays in the production of LNG (liquefied natural gas) and liquid helium. “Renergen was set to start with its liquid helium production in December 2022. But due to a technical glitch with one of the compressors, the entire operation to produce helium again had to be delayed, which further distressed the share price and the stock moved down to about R23/R24 towards the end of the year,” he adds. Nasdaq listing Clark says what’s left is for the company to apply for its Nasdaq listing in the US, which he anticipates will be concluded by May. “We’ll see a listing for Renergen in the US, where energy stocks are much better understood than they are on the JSE and the Australian Stock Exchange.” “They will also be finalising the engineering procurement contract (EPC) of Virginia phase 2 – which is 12 times larger than Virginia phase 1,” he adds. Clark estimates that Virginia phase 2 will go online in the middle of 2026 and is estimated to cost anything between R12 billion and R15 billion. Read: CEF completes due diligence on R1bn Renergen Virginia Gas Project investment “Renergen was behind the curve, the market gave it a slap, it has now recovered… The market should now focus on what the underlying profitability of revenue and cash flow will be from the embryonic Virginia phase 1, to the gargantuan Virginia phase 2,” he comments. Clark says phase 2, which will see Renergen significantly scaling up its production of LNG and liquid helium, will position the company as one of the top global gas producers in the world. Reflecting on Virginia’s progress, Marani says: “This milestone is a major catalyst for Renergen and South Africa. There are more countries in the world that have nuclear arsenal than there are that have liquid helium production capabilities.” Listen to Marani speaking about Renergen delivering its first domestically-produced liquefied natural gas in December (or read the transcript):  Nondumiso Lehutso is a Moneyweb intern.