While most of the forecasts predict tougher economic conditions in 2023, that doesn’t mean there will be no profits to be made for investors – whether in stock markets or on the mergers and acquisitions (M&A) market. If a recession occurs, it won’t necessarily mean that investors will be unable to profit – they will just have to work that bit harder to find them. There will still be opportunities available, albeit maybe fewer, that can be taken advantage of as long as investors know where to look for them and seek the right advice. Certainly, investing in a bull market is easier because the overall market trend may drive up the prices of many stocks that really shouldn’t rise. A bear market poses more difficulty in predicting trends and requires interpretation of a lot more information to cut through the noise The FTSE/JSE All Share Index (ALSI) last year outperformed the global equity markets (MSCI All Country World Index) and is also under-priced – thereby providing some appealing investment opportunities that recognise generally attractive valuations with the upside potential for future earnings. US investment bank JPMorgan says M&A activity in Sub-Saharan Africa is likely to top USD100bn in 2023, the same level as 2022 and slightly down on 2021. Though not everybody is sanguine that the Africa Continental Free Trade Area agreement will deliver on its rather over-sold promises (given a poor record by African governments in implementing multinational agreements) it may yet serve to bolster foreign investment in Africa. There are a number of factors which drove deal activity in 2021 and 2022 and they remain largely in-tact, still stimulating M&A sentiment across Africa at the moment: rising international investor interest in fintech opportunities, renewable energy, digital infrastructure, as well as the factor that local companies – both large corporates and SMEs – are continuing to produce solid financial performances. Specific to South Africa, the rand remains weak, and interest rates are expected to remain within a reasonable range despite the recent hikes. I expect investment markets to prosper in 2023, and the M&A market in particular to perform above general expectations. Andrew Bahlmann is CEO: corporate and advisory at Deal Leaders International.