President Cyril Ramaphosa has appealed to the board of South Africa’s cash-strapped power utility to suspend its biggest electricity-price increase in more than a decade as the nation faces two more years of rolling blackouts. Read: SA faces two more years of power outages, Eskom says Eskom Holdings won approval by the national energy regulator to raise electricity tariffs by an inflation-beating 18.65% and 12.74% for the next two years on January 12. The first increase is set to take effect in April. “It will not be fair to impose the tariff on our people while there is load shedding,” he said, using a local term for power cuts. Read: SA relaxes local-content rules to ease power crisis Ramaphosa’s comments come after Eskom said the country could face two years of persistent blackouts as it overhauls its aging power stations. He spoke in the central Free State province. The tariff increases are a key input in the National Treasury’s plan to a shift portion of Eskom’s debt of about R400 billion ($23 billion) onto the state’s balance sheet. It’s expected to announce the quantum of the transfer in February’s budget. Read: Only political will can address loadshedding woes – BLSA An additional 6 000 megawatts of capacity is needed to stabilise the grid and a “great deal of progress” is being made in unlocking logjams to close the shortfall, Ramaphosa said. In addition to procuring extra capacity, the government will ensure Eskom’s diesel-fed power stations at Gourikwa and Ankerlig have enough fuel to boost power output when its coal-fired plants can’t meet demand, he said. That would reduce the severity of outages. Read: How load shedding is crippling municipalities Eskom produces almost all the country’s electricity, and blackouts curb output in Africa’s most industrialised economy. Intense outages imposed earlier this month have taken a toll on industry and agriculture, and there’s a 45% chance of the nation slipping into a recession this year, a Bloomberg survey of economists shows.