 You can also listen to this podcast on iono.fm here. In this, the first episode of The Property Pod for the new year, we look at what could be in store for South Africa’s commercial property sector in 2023. The start of a new year is generally marked with optimism, new year resolutions and renewed drive after the December break. Will there be optimism in SA’s broader property industry? Which sectors will shine, and which ones will face headwinds? On this latest podcast, we speak to John Loos, senior economist and property strategist at FNB Commercial Property Finance, who shares his insights and outlook for 2023. Highlights of his interview appear below. You can also listen to the full podcast above or download it from iono, Spotify or Apple Podcasts. John Loos, senior economist and property strategist at FNB Commercial Property Finance. Image: Supplied Highlights “I think [it will be] probably a slower year, a weaker market year compared to [2022]. We’ve had a mediocre recovery – let’s put it that way. “After the hard lockdowns and the big recession of 2020, we had big dips in property-market sales activity in that year. We also had quite a big dip in capital values as well – well, net operating incomes, capital values. That was a hard year.” “Since then … there has been what I call partial recovery in the property market, out of that deep recession. But I think 2022 was as good as it got for the time being.” “Our property broker surveys already showed sales activity and rental market activity in all three of the major commercial property sectors starting to slow as the year went on, because of interest rate hikes and renewed global and local economic pressures starting to show.” “We believe that last year’s [2022] economic growth rates will probably be about 1.9% when we get the final numbers … and that in 2023 we will see a slightly slower economic growth rate, perhaps 1.5%; a slightly slower economic growth rate this year, and possibly one more interest rate hike this month, in January, [with] the full effect of interest rate hiking still to come through into the property market.” Read:
The importance of interest rates and the Fed
Interest rates are up 325bps this year; how this affects your debt [Nov 2022]
Sarb ratchets repo rate by another 75bps [Nov 2022] “We think that sales-wise probably slower transaction volumes of property, slower expansion rates of businesses and therefore growth in tenant demand for commercial property space, and so slower all-round activity. And therefore probably [a return] to some sort of slow capital growth, very low single-digit capital growth which does not keep up with general inflation, and therefore in real terms a real decline in property values.” “That’s unfortunately the scenario that I believe will play out this year, with the full effect of interest rate hiking – not only locally but across the world – still having to feed through into property markets.” Which sectors of the property market do you think are going to be the top performers in 2023? Will office still struggle? “I think that the relative performances will remain as they were last year – in other words, industrial being the best performer, retail property somewhere in the middle, and office property the weakest of the three big commercial property sectors. “If you had a fourth one, hotel property – I think that’s still battling to fully recover and will probably be an underperformer along with office property.” “But I think the difference is that while last year we still for a while had a strengthening industrial property market, the industrial market is also likely [to be] slowing at the moment and will be a bit slower this year.” Listen/read: Logistics and industrial property demand still on the up “It [industrial/logistics property] has had the advantage over the other sectors of a sort of gearing up for greater online retail and all the logistics and warehousing requirements that that requires. But it cannot defy economic gravity forever.” “Manufacturing is in a weak situation at the moment, and the general inventory levels throughout the economy are weak. That I think will take its toll on the industrial property market, along with interest rate hiking. So it has its pressures as well.” “But nevertheless, while all three sectors I think will go slower this year, it will still be, relatively speaking, industrial [as] the outperformer, retail second, [and] office and hotel property being the strugglers.” Hospitality property “If one looks at hotel income data from Stats SA – I try to look at that every month – we’ve seen a very significant recovery, as you would expect. The hotel sector took a huge knock during lockdowns; it was virtually totally locked down at one stage. So it really has battled.” “It has recovered very significantly from that very low base in 2020, as one would expect.” “[But] the incomes as of late last year were still not back to the 2019 level.” “I think it’s partly because the household sector, which makes up the holiday markets in the country, has taken a financial knock through the lockdown period, the Covid-19 period, so holiday spending is a luxury item for most people. Listen/read: Five-star Radisson Hotel debuts at Vivian Reddy’s Oceans Umhlanga mega development “You can put it on the back burner when financial times are tough. And with interest rates now rising and with higher inflation financial times are tough or toughening yet again after some Covid improvement.” “Then there’s the foreign-tourism market. [Tourists] suffer the same impacts of global economic slowdowns, job creation slowdowns and inflation and interest rates rising as we do locally. So there’s that financial pressure in general.” “Then one looks at business travel. Now that’s an interesting one. I think there’s been a more permanent change there. I don’t think that [we] who work in corporates just jump on a plane to Cape Town and go and stay in a hotel overnight for a few meetings as much as we used to before Covid.” “We’ve managed to successfully put a lot of our business interactions online on [Microsoft] Teams and the Zoom platforms. So, while some business travel has returned, I don’t think it’s back at the levels it was in 2019 and I don’t think it’s going to get back there easily because we’ve realised that we can interact online much more effectively. “We don’t have to travel as much anymore, and so business-travel budgets will not be what they used to be.” Read:
Business class for $20 000 means staff fly coach or not at all [Sept 2022]
How working from home will permanently change the way we travel [Feb 2022]
Airlines count on Zoom fatigue to revive business travel [June 2021] Impact of higher interest rates “There’s been very significant interest rate hiking since late 2021. As I’ve said, we expect one more [hike] this month in January, one of 50 basis points, and then at FNB we think that that’s the end of interest rate hiking and that rates will go sideways for most of this year. But there is a considerable lag. “Many economists talk about 18 to 24 months before the full impact of interest rate hiking is felt in the economy. So that’s a considerable time.” “Think of things like property development, for instance, and property transactions. A lot of purchases and developments are planned well in advance of them actually happening. So there’s stuff in the pipeline that still happens, even though interest rates have been rising.” “But new plans to either acquire properties or develop new properties, those decisions are often based on current interest rate levels which are now considerably higher, and those that impact on those volumes will be seen only in the coming months during the course of this year.” “I think realistically there [will be] quite a considerable time lag before you see the volume of transactions noticeably declining, or the volume of property demand noticeably declining in response to interest rate hiking because of the leads and lags in decision-making processes.” Listed property “I don’t specifically watch the Reits [real estate investment trusts] and their financial performances but I think, if one looks at their fundamentals, the net operating-income growth on their properties that they hold, generally speaking you’ll see that growth rate slow from last year because their tenant population in general will be coming under additional financial pressure due to interest rate hiking, higher inflation and the slower economy. “The tenant population is also having debt [issues of its] own.” “If we look to earlier last year, already the most recent TPN [Credit Bureau] data, you saw tenant payment performance starting to weaken slightly earlier last year already, just after the interest rate hiking had started. So I think it’s a weaker year for the tenant population and therefore, in terms of net operating-income growth for the listed property sector, a weaker year than was the case last year.”