Last year was a tumultuous year in global equity markets and while the JSE eked out a positive return in rand terms, it still moved backwards when converted to the greenback. We saw growth expectations moderate as the year progressed thereby impacting the earnings outlook for companies near term – we still see quite a bit of value in the local equity market for 2023. That said, risks are still rife as the war in Ukraine continues, China’s policy implementation remains haphazard, and inflation stays elevated. Locally, the growth outlook has been tempered by the impact of continued and intensifying load shedding which will undoubtedly impact company profitability and/or balance sheets (depending on whether they become self-reliant or not). Against this backdrop, we prefer: Chantal Marx, head of investments research at FNB Wealth and Investments Mondi (MNP) is an international paper and packaging group with production operations in over 30 countries. The group’s key operations are in central Europe and South Africa. Mondi is currently trading at a smaller premium to its peers relative to history. It is also trading well below its historic average forward PE and forward EV/Ebitda multiples. We think the counter offers decent, defensive long-term value at current levels. Mondi Forward PE over time  Source: Bloomberg The Investco Solar ETF (TAN US) is based on the MAC Global Solar Energy Index that is comprised of companies in the solar energy industry. Its largest investments include First Solar, SolarEdge Technologies, Enphase, Xinyi Solar and GCL Technology. The ETF ran up hard in the wake of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, but the price has since steadied at lower levels. The companies within this ETF are highly exposed to the US residential solar PV market, which still has substantial room for growth. We view the industry as a good long-term investment and this ETF as an effective means to invest therein. Sithembile Bopela, Investment Analyst at FNB Wealth and Investments Shoprite Holdings (SHP) is the largest fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) retailer on the African continent. The group has a large geographic footprint with a presence in several countries across Africa through brands including Shoprite, Checkers, Usave, OK, House & Home and Hungry Lion. Overall, the business remains operationally sound, boasting a strong balance sheet and is highly cash generative. On a valuation perspective, Shoprite appears to offer fair value on a forward PE of 20.1 times and a forward dividend yield of 2.9% complemented by a strong growth profile and defensive business model. Alibaba (BABA US) is one of the largest e-commerce players in China. It provides tech infrastructure and marketing to build businesses and create value. From a valuation perspective Alibaba is trading on a forward PE of 13.7 times, which remains undemanding relative to its peers and its own historic rating. We expect volatility around the price amid prevailing headwinds but are still positive on the long-term growth trajectory of the company and its various subsidiaries. Alibaba forward PE premium (discount) to competitors over time  Source: Bloomberg Pritu Makan, Investment Analyst at FNB Wealth and Investments Bidcorp (BID) Bidcorp is a market-leading food service product distributor across several geographies including the United Kingdom, Europe, Middle East, South America, the Asia-Pacific region, and South Africa. The company’s business units operate across the food and ingredient manufacturing sectors, such as catering, hospitality, leisure, baked products, poultry, meat, seafood, and processing. The strategy is to grow organically in existing regions and acquisitively in new ones, with improvements in the customer mix and value add opportunities providing further upside potential. The company remains financially strong with relatively low levels of gearing and a robust business model with solid diversification and defensive characteristics. Bidcorp is trading on a forward PE of 18 times, below its historic average rating of 20 times. CrowdStrike (CRWD US) CrowdStrike, a global cybersecurity leader, provides cloud-delivered protection across endpoints, cloud workloads, identity and data, and leading threat intelligence, managed security services, IT operations management, threat hunting, Zero Trust identity protection, and log management. Cyber Security remains an ever-evolving market, with focus shifting from the perimeter of the network to deeper within the network and addressing endpoints, users, and applications. The group is disrupting a $7 to $8 billion corporate endpoint market with the competitive environment becoming more favourable. CrowdStrike is also acquiring market share faster than other disruptors with consensus expecting the group to dominate around 15% to 20% of the segment by 2025. The company is also well-positioned to navigate through macroeconomic headwinds as tighter budgets could accelerate consolidation and standardisation among platform providers, which will boost the adoption of CrowdStrike’s add-on products in areas such as identity and log security. In addition, competition is limited from firewall peers. Consensus is positive on the stock and the average target price on the sell-side is $168 per share, representing 73% upside from current levels. 12-month consensus target price versus market price  Source: Bloomberg Jalpa Bhoolia, Investment Analyst at FNB Wealth and Investments Glencore (GLN) Glencore is one of the world’s largest global diversified resource companies. The group engages in the production and marketing of metals and minerals, agricultural products, and energy products. Glencore is the market leader in terms of its commodities trading and marketing business. Glencore had a great run last year, but we still believe that there is room for upside potential especially considering the play that the Chinese economy has on the commodity sector. The company is committed to returning cash to shareholders which means that the potential for capital growth is complimented by an attractive forward dividend yield of 9.6%. Glencore 12-month forward dividend yield – five-year history  Source: Bloomberg Schlumberger (SLB US) Formed in 1929 by Conrad and Marcel Schlumberger, Schlumberger is the largest global oilfield services company in the world, holding 33% market share. The company provides technology and services to the energy industry for reservoir characterisation, drilling, production, and processing. Hashmeel Suka, Investment Analyst at FNB Wealth and Investments Balwin Properties (BWN) Balwin operates as a real estate property development firm in South Africa, specialising in the construction as well as the rental of apartment complexes and lifestyle estates. The company also offers various after-sales services including fibre to the home (FTTH), solar energy and insurance. Balwin’s portfolio currently consists of 97 developments and over 47 000 apartments. It is the largest sectional title developer in South Africa. Balwin targets high-density, high-growth metropolitan areas in South Africa and has a long-term development pipeline (45 000 apartments) in such locations. Hence, it is well-positioned to address the lack of quality and affordable housing in the low to middle income market. An added benefit for the company is the high barriers to entry within the industry. Fundamentally speaking, the company has been performing well – in its 1H23 results, it reported accelerated growth in both headline earnings per share (+47%) and revenue (+20%), driven by increased unit sales and higher selling prices. Input costs have been well controlled, and the overall balance sheet position is strong. Currently, the stock is trading at R3.03, a 61% discount to NAV (R7.71). The counter is trading on a historic PE ratio of 3.42 times, which looks attractive compared to its five-year average rating as well as its medium-term growth profile. Balwin Properties NAV and premium (discount) to NAV  Source: Bloomberg Dufry (DUFN SW) Dufry is a Swiss-based travel retailer operating over 2 300 duty-free and duty-paid stores in various airports, cruise lines and railway stations around the world, representing an overall market share of 11%, with most of the company’s historic growth realised through a series of strategic acquisitions. The company operates using differentiated retail brands which are fully integrated into the business. It also operates a joint venture with Alibaba (in China) as well as independent brand boutiques on behalf of Hugo Boss, Jimmy Choo, Gucci, Lacoste, and other well-known brands. The majority of turnover is generated from the sale of Perfumes and Cosmetics (31%), Food Confectionary and Catering (22%), Wine and Spirits (17%) as well as Luxury Goods (11%). The stock is currently trading at CHF41.43 while consensus has a price target of CHF45.71 – representing a potential upside of 10%. However, consensus has been slow to adjust to new dynamics in international travel, including a potential full reopening of the Chinese economy. We therefore see upside risk to current earnings estimates and by extension, valuations.