It is abundantly clear that an approach which regards university education as the only worthy course to improve the lives of the disadvantaged in South Africa is simply out of touch with reality. In fact, having spent time on the examination committees for professional examinations in two professions over the last 25 years, my overall impression is that universities are not succeeding in producing suitable candidates of quality in sufficient quantities to enter professions. My observations are that candidates across different professions are able to regurgitate memorised knowledge, but are ill equipped to apply that knowledge to a real-life situation or case study. This is probably partially the result of the state of educational development in which universities receive their students from the school system. Students starting tertiary education have been spoon-fed in a school system that is focussed on preparing them to pass an examination. In order to ensure sufficient flow-through to comply with subsidy formulae, it seems that some universities have (out of necessity) watered down the core idea of a university as an institution of learning through exploring new frames of reference across disciplines. Lecturing on a part-time basis at four tertiary education institutions over the last 30 years has disclosed to me a general trend where students were increasingly reluctant to read widely about the subject matter and regarded tertiary studies as another preparation to pass an examination. Students who understand the core idea of university study have become a much rarer phenomenon. The result is a lack of both a wide frame of reference and a general understanding of a wide body of knowledge to enable students to see new patterns and understand new developments. This watering down produces graduates with insufficient abilities to adapt to a rapidly changing work environment and labour market. The skills of sourcing, reading, analysing, thinking, integrating, and applying information and knowledge are not sufficiently developed to ensure a smooth transition into professions. Add to this an insufficient level of numeracy and literacy skills in parts of the population. This places substantial pressure on professional competency examinations. It is not uncommon for professions to report pass rates of well below 50% of candidates who entered the examinations – frequently resulting in negative media coverage and questions about the fairness of the process of entry into the profession. Although the world has changed and is changing rapidly, certain basic human needs stay the same or change less rapidly. Even so, rapid advances in knowledge and technology may rapidly change the solutions to the challenges of satisfying these needs for a growing population. The information age has also brought information overload and many distractions, leading to a decrease in attention span. Some publications estimate the average attention span of teenagers today at 65 seconds. If South Africa could start from scratch, how can the trends identified above be reversed? The points above may be easier said than done, but South Africa has to focus and start somewhere if we want to unlock the human potential of our population. If we succeed, we all win.