According to the South African Canegrowers Association’s (SA Canegrowers’) scenario modelling, continuous load shedding between Stages 4 and 6 will cost growers over R723 million in 2023. This figure soars to over R1.8 billion when power outages are escalated to Stages between 6 and 8. “Anything beyond stage 8 could cost the industry more than R2.4 billion,” it adds in a statement issued on Thursday. SA Canegrowers chair Andrew Russell indicates that load shedding affects 1 135 irrigated growers who employ over 10 000 workers. “Growers are expected to incur more than R189 million in additional energy costs in 2023, on account of the disruption to irrigation schedules,” he adds. Read: Could KZN cane growers’ plan to save the industry work? (Dec 2022) “In addition to the increased cost of energy, growers also face yield losses as they have fewer hours of continuous energy supply. Growers need a minimum of six hours of continuous energy for proper irrigation. As a result of the intermittency of the power supply disrupting irrigation, irrigated growers will lose up to 40% water capacity.” He notes that the resulting loss of yield could cost more than R723 million. Russell says the continuation of load shedding, without alternative arrangements to enable irrigation, poses other long-term implications for the industry. “Sugarcane stalks left in the ground can produce cane for up to 10 years. Insufficient irrigation not only reduces cane quality and causes yield losses, but it will also lead to increased stool mortality, significantly shortening the lifespan of the cane.” Moreover, Russell says considering that sugar refining giant Tongaat Hulett was placed under business rescue in October 2022, along with the anticipated increase in sugar tax in National Treasury’s budget next month, the implications “are potentially catastrophic for growers and industry workers”. Read:
Tongaat Hulett forced into business rescue (Oct 2022)
Consortium of cane growers wants to buy a chunk of Tongaat’s assets (Nov 2022)
Tongaat’s BRPs settle on payment plan with canegrowers (Nov 2022) “SA Canegrowers is therefore appealing to Eskom and government to help the industry in particular, as well as the broader agricultural sector, to find urgent solutions to mitigate the impact of load shedding.” Russell says the association has asked government to consider restricting Stage 4 load shedding in irrigated cane-growing areas, which include Komatipoort and Pongola, during peak watering season as a short-term relief measure. He says the association has also made a request for diesel rebates for growers utilising generators and tax rebates for those investing in alternative energy sources. Read: Sugar industry calls for scrapping of sugar tax, again (Dec 2022) “We will continue to engage with all industry stakeholders as we work to save the one million livelihoods that the sugar industry supports.” Nondumiso Lehutso is a Moneyweb intern.