There exists a perception among Discovery Vitality members that attaining the top Diamond status on the group’s behaviour change programme gets harder and harder each year. The financial services group has, over time, tweaked rules of the programme as it matched changes in behaviour to real-life outcomes, using either its own mortality data or those of scientific studies. It’s important to understand why Vitality exists in the first place. Because insurers and medical aid schemes are not legally allowed to discount premiums or contributions, Discovery launched the programme which rewards members with certain discounts for making healthier choices (some other medical aids and insurers have similar programmes). Crucially, there is a monthly contribution per member for Vitality. For this year, it’s R329 for a single member, R399 for two adults, and R465 for any number above that. Simply put, members need to derive benefits greater than the contribution for this to make financial sense. To analyse whether it is now more difficult to attain Diamond status on Vitality than in the recent past, Moneyweb compared the Vitality points allocations from 2019 (pre-Covid-19 pandemic) with those for 2023. Earning points Members earn Vitality points for a number of screening checks and assessments, and for exercise throughout the year. Thresholds to achieve the various statuses effectively double for two members (and increase by 50% of a single member for any additional adult dependents). Importantly, the thresholds for a couple on Vitality are pooled and per member limits remain – in other words, both need to be ‘engaged’ members to achieve anything more than Silver (the Diamond status threshold for a single, highly engaged member). In 2020, Discovery introduced a points threshold for Diamond. Prior to this, reaching Gold status for three consecutive years moved a member to Diamond. When it made this change, it also reduced the points thresholds for Bronze, Silver and Gold levels “to encourage engagement and to align thresholds with points earning categories and health outcomes”. It also said: “The Vitality points threshold to get to Diamond Vitality status will be 50 000 Vitality points to align the Vitality annual engagement and long-term mortality and morbidity outcomes of a Diamond Vitality status member.” That’s key – one’s Vitality status is arguably significantly more valuable to Discovery’s actuaries than to the member themselves. Based on one’s Vitality status, Discovery can infer a number of expected ‘outcomes’ (as it euphemistically refers to it). The most important of these is average life expectancy, but there are strong correlations to driving behaviour and financial health too. Discovery has launched specific Vitality Drive and Vitality Money programmes for its Insure and Bank clients (to measure risk across these client bases even more accurately). The actual points allocations for the Vitality Health Check and overall maximum for Vitality fitness points have not changed between 2019 and this year. Members can earn up to 22 500 points for the health check, depending on how many of their results for the five checks (blood pressure, blood glucose, cholesterol, a weight assessment and signing a non-smoker’s declaration) are in range. Points allocations decline based on the number of results in range, and members are further ‘penalised’ for the number of those results not in range that are deemed “high-risk”. One might be a healthy smoker that scores within range on all the checks, but smoking would be deemed “high-risk” so only 12 500 points would be earned in this instance. (Historically, the smoking declaration was separate but with this as part of the Vitality Health Check, it is practically not possible to attain Diamond status, which makes sense when one considers the correlation to mortality.) Source: Discovery The maximum amount of fitness points one can earn in any given year was 30 000 pre-pandemic and remains that now. Up to 7 500 points can be earned in a Vitality Fitness Assessment once a year, and between 50 and 300 points can be earned per fitness activity. Most of these are based on workouts where heart rate activity is measured, and the programme has become stricter over the maximum number of points that can be allocated for steps alone (there is a 1 000 fitness point limit per year for between 5 000 and 9 999 steps a day, which earns 50 points per achievement). Following the threshold reductions in 2020, one could argue that it is easier to improve your Vitality status if you’re relatively active, do the fitness assessment and max out your fitness points annually. The maximum allocation of 30 000 points is 75% of the amount needed for Gold. The points awarded for other assessments, checks and vaccines has largely remained the same over the last four years: The points structure for an HIV test and counselling has changed significantly since 2019. Then, members would earn 5 000 points a year for doing a test. Now, members earn 7 500 points for their first test and 1 000 points per year thereafter. Purchasing HealthyFood items (fruit, veg) at Woolworths or Pick n Pay – and, crucially, not purchasing unhealthy items (processed foods, foods with high salt content) – can earn up to 12 000 points a year. Each healthy item earns 20 points, and each unhealthy one sees 20 points deducted. A modest 10 HealthyFood items (net) per month, would mean 2 400 points a year. What it takes to get to Diamond An illustrative scenario, based on a member who does all the basics (online assessments, Vitality Health Check, dental check-up and HIV test) and buys an achievable amount of HealthyFood at a Vitality partner, shows that members need to earn an additional 9 000 fitness points a year now to attain Diamond status. This is equivalent to an additional 45 moderate 30-minute workouts (at 70-79% of maximum heart rate – 200 points each). The overall ask to reach Diamond – 25 600 fitness points – is steep. This means 128 moderate workouts – effectively one every three days. Achieving more than 10 000 steps on non-workout days brings that number down significantly, though, to around one workout a week. Logically, this makes sense when one considers that Discovery uses Vitality statuses to model (and price) risk. Diamond threshold * Regardless of results. An additional 5 000 points can be earned depending on results. An alternative way of looking at this is how many of the other checks and assessments one needs to do if you are able to reach the 30 000 fitness point maximum annually. Just doing this will get a member to Silver (25 000 points). Adding a Health Check and achieving four results in range will get a member to Gold (40 000 points). Diamond is the real stretch, though. The thing is, Discovery has de-emphasised the value of a Diamond status, especially when a member is only a Vitality Health member. Years ago, the bulk of the reward discounts were variable and dependent on one’s Vitality status. Now, the only discount dependent on one’s Vitality status is the flight discount. And the difference between Gold (30% discount) and Diamond (35% discount) on a maximum of six domestic and two international flights a year really isn’t that material. Read: Discovery Vitality reduces discount flights, overhauls travel benefits If you’re all in on the Discovery ecosystem (especially life insurance or investments with Discovery Invest), this will be a different calculation as boosts/discounts are influenced by Vitality. With a Discovery Bank banking suite and Vitality Money, the consideration isn’t as complex because (for now), the Discovery Miles rewards structure here isn’t at all linked to your Vitality status, rather on the number of products you have. Read: Discovery gives Vitality members two big reasons to open an account Maybe the question that needs to be asked is whether it’s necessary to achieve Diamond status on Vitality at all.