The South African Revenue Service (Sars) on Tuesday published an interpretation note which clarifies how it will be determining arm’s length pricing for intra-group loans, in an effort to clamp down on the manipulation of the system and ensure that tax jurisdictions get what is owed to them. The ‘Determination of the taxable income of certain persons from international transactions: Intra-group loans’ note is available here. According to Sars the new rules are aimed at reducing the manipulation of transfer prices especially in cases related to cross-border transactions between related parties where parties can manipulate transfer prices to get a “more desirable tax outcome”. It says this playing of the system often results in tax jurisdictions not receiving the tax revenue they’re rightfully entitled to. Section 31 of the Income Tax Act deems it necessary for the transfer price of a specified international transaction between related persons or associated enterprises to be based on the arm’s length principle when determining taxable income. This section of legislation also sets out the tax consequences for not following its stipulations. According to Sars an arm’s length price can broadly be understood as “a price negotiated on the open market between a willing buyer and a willing seller”. “One of the areas of concern which has been subject to debate relates to arm’s length pricing for intra-group loans, for example, a cross-border loan between companies in a multinational group of companies,” it says. “The pricing of intra-group loans includes a consideration of both the amount of debt and the cost of the debt. An intra-group loan would be incorrectly priced if the amount of debt funding, the cost of the debt or both are excessive compared to what is arm’s length. “It therefore remains critically important that in any intra-group transactions the principle of arms-length principle is scrupulously observed by those participating in such a transaction.” Sars notes that for those parties that fail to comply with its new guidance, it will act “sternly” to protect the fiscus. It says companies that fall within the scope of Section 31 must have an approved transfer policy that aligns with the arm’s length principle and must be able to demonstrate their compliance and correct implementation when the taxman comes knocking. Read:
Solutions to improve trust oversight may still be challenged
Potential window of opportunity for non-compliant taxpayers