 You can also listen to this podcast on iono.fm here. This transcript is a translation from the original interview, which was conducted in Afrikaans and aired on RSG Geldsake, here. RYK VAN NIEKERK: Another industry seriously affected by load shedding is the franchise industry, and particularly tenant franchises like KFC. KFC has indicated that some of their branches have had to close because they haven’t enough stock, and the group has also said that not all meals on the menu are available owing to stock shortages. Nando’s has also said that they are struggling to obtain fresh products. Astral Foods is the chief group supplying poultry products to several of these franchises. Astral CEO Chris Schutte is on the line. Chris, welcome to the programme. How widespread is this problem and to what extent can the problem be laid at the door of load shedding? CHRIS SCHUTTE: Good afternoon, Ryk. Just some perspective. We slaughter 300 million chickens a year. At any given moment in the day we have 37 million chickens. We have a 2.5-year planning system. All these plans are made on two-minute cycles. If you go through four generations of chicken for 2.5 years, and you get to the end of the process unable to process or slaughter the chickens, you have to hold the chickens back on the farm, and give them additional feed. And where we effectively look at slaughtering a chicken after 32 days at a target weight of 1.8kg, the chickens now grow to a weight of 3.5/4kg. If you look at Nando’s and KFC and the franchises you mentioned, they have very, very specific menus that guarantee a constant weight for the portions. As a result [of the load shedding] you become unable to deliver enough chicken of a predetermined size to accommodate their menus. The outlets can’t suddenly change their menus. Read:
KFC SA to close some units due to power cuts
Just find the wretched money for the diesel! Thus, the big problem is that we are not producing chickens of the appropriate weight, and we have arrived at a point where the industry is unable to deliver those weight categories and it has became necessary to close those 70-odd shops at short notice. I understand most have reopened, but for much shorter business hours, and with adjusted menus. RYK VAN NIEKERK: So it’s a whole supply-chain problem. How are these shortages affecting, for example, the prices of chicken? CHRIS SCHUTTE: [Chicken] is a commodity in the long term. So far, Ryk, our planning for the first half of this year has been not to [deliver] 10 million chickens, because of their increased age such that that all our facilities are full, right back to our genetic material. One now has to remove those chickens or they will be 50 days old and you no longer have space. We therefore have had to take an unhappy decision not to deliver 10 million eggs to the farm hatchery; these were basically smashed. So that vacuum will enter the market in some fashion. I understand that not only we but the entire industry have been similarly affected. So a vacuum has arisen somewhere in the production line, and because this is a commodity the price is determined by supply and demand and it will be picked up somewhere. But we do not envisage making this the driving force. The driving force behind price increases is only the operational cost of processing, which is driven by the shortage of electricity. We therefore have to produce our own energy, partly with generators. RYK VAN NIEKERK: You have one of the biggest diesel plants in South Africa, built especially for such problems. Tell us a little about this plant and its impact on your business. CHRIS SCHUTTE: The plant was built in the well-know Standerton factory [in Mpumalanga]. For some time there has been a shortage of electricity and water – as well as roads and other services. We have therefore become pretty independent in terms of water supply. We still receive water from the municipality, but with the shortage of power the guys cannot pump enough water, so we are looking at additional water storage equipment at our plants countrywide, and …we have necessarily had to cancel other capital projects planned for reinvestment in growth and creating jobs, so that that money can be used to generate power. In Standerton we built a small village with eight 1.5MW diesel units, a total of 12MW, to produce a mere 50% of our power at that plant. The capital outlay is unfortunate, but maintenance also affects production costs. I don’t think anyone realises it, but in Stage 3 load shedding we burn R5.3 million worth of diesel every 48 hours. That has not been reckoned anywhere in our prices. It has to be recovered somewhere, from the market or wherever, and unfortunately for our clients and the consumers we can’t maintain a sustainable business if the input costs are not recovered. Those costs have to filter through to the market, and this will probably happen sooner rather than later or we’ll not have a sustainable business. RYK VAN NIEKERK: You have various plants throughout the country, many more than the Standerton plant. Have you instituted similar initiatives at the other plants? CHRIS SCHUTTE: There’s an interesting initiative in the Western Cape, for instance, where we have a big plant just behind Paarl – as well as a feed mill. There we have an agreement with the authorities to give them electricity from our feed plant, and we will fit in with the electricity provision table, but in exchange they will give our plant a little more electricity. We also have power generators there. So there we are a little less reliant on the volatile load shedding. RYK VAN NIEKERK: You are the chief executive of a very large South African company. If you take a step back and look at the situation playing out in South Africa currently, do you see it as simply the cost of doing business in South Africa, and does it make you angry? Or how do you look at it? CHRIS SCHUTTE: I almost forgot to wish you a prosperous new year – but I have lost any concept of the word ‘prosperous’. Yes, we are angry because, despite everything that you pay tax for and that needs to be serviced, you now have to do twice as much at additional expense. Chicken is a consumer commodity, their meat protein, and we have always boasted that we produce the cheapest kilogramme of meat protein in South Africa. But that is getting more and more expensive as a consequence of government institutions that simply fail. Yes, one gets angry, but that’s because you [have to] make other plans, and those plans always come at addition cost. Read:
KFC owner Yum exits Russia, sells business to local franchisee
Tastier chicken boosts Astral dividend
Nando’s gives customers a ‘bright side’ to load shedding When I chat with people, and sit down with my board and my advisors and my staff, I always ask if they can foresee any change to this situation – no one can give me a positive answer. That’s why all our capital projects for the next three years have been cancelled or converted in order for us to remain sustainable. That in itself is something to worry about – that the demand and future demand for and growth of the chicken industry will level off because we have to reinvest in things other than in effectiveness and capacity. RYK VAN NIEKERK: Chris, thank you for your time tonight. That was Astral CEO Chris Schutte. [Aside to Theo Vorster]  Theo, harsh words. I think that’s what is being discussed in every board meeting [today]. THEO VORSTER: Look, Chris is always focused on solutions in his business. That has always been evident. But to hear this type of strategy change, where it’s not about future growth anymore but about protection of capital and to stay in business, for the simple reason that the state that you depend on to provide wholesale services, is collapsing and that state should be replaced by the price sector. As Chris rightly said, that comes at a price.