 SIMON BROWN: I’m chatting now with Richard Carter, head of Assurance at Allan Gray. Richard, I appreciate the early morning time. [On] the two-pot system, or the plan to amend our retirement system into a two-pot system, talk started during the pandemic. [There was] a lot of talk around last year. Where are we sitting in terms of implementation dates? Read:
Regulatory update: Two-Pot System for retirement funds (Jan 2023)
A two-pot retirement system … the lesser of two evils (Sep 2022)
Treasury moves implementation of two-pot system to 2024 (Podcast: Sep 2022) RICHARD CARTER: Well, that’s a very good question. There ‘s still a lot that needs to be finalised and put in place. So I wouldn’t like to say it’ll come in on this date or that date. I’m not sure we are close enough to be able to say. I think Treasury would like us to get it in as soon as possible, but there’s still a long way to go and a lot of the final details haven’t been pinned down. Until you do that it’s very hard to actually say, ‘well, it will take effect on this day’. SIMON BROWN: I want to come to some of those perhaps final details still being pinned down in a moment. Where we are sitting right now, as I understand it, is broad agreement that your Regulation 28 funds will sort of be split into an investment pot two-thirds, [and] a savings pot one-third and we could access that savings [pot] post implementation. RICHARD CARTER: Yes, absolutely. [There is] broad agreement that that’s a better system and that, if we could get to a system where two-thirds of your savings are more protected, those two-thirds will make it to retirement and actually be [available] to be used to provide an income. [There’s] broad agreement that that’s a better model and that you wouldn’t have to resign or change jobs to get access to the one-third, which would be sort of viewed as the emergency pot; but that would be better. So yes, there’s definitely broad agreement that that’s a better way forward. SIMON BROWN: That’s a great point you make there because a lot of folks look at this and think, ‘Aah, it’s a terrible idea. People are accessing their retirement money early’. The truth is, as you mentioned there, people are just having to resign, cash out, and pay tax [on their retirement withdrawals]. This, if it works well – and certainly on paper it looks like a good idea – could actually improve retirement savings in the country. RICHARD CARTER: Yes, absolutely. That is the whole point. We have a retirement system that works very well for some people. There are people who get to retirement with meaningful [savings, but it is a] minority. SIMON BROWN: Sorry, I lost you there for a moment. We got the point: it is a minority. Withdrawals: the note that you sent out suggested that [when the system is implemented] this will be taxed as income, which kind of makes it then tax-neutral, because of course I get the benefit of a Reg 28 fund when I put the money in. And then the withdrawal I make out of my savings portion would just be added to income. RICHARD CARTER: Yes. So Treasury’s concern – or not just Treasury’s, I suppose – would be that there’d be abuse the moment you make it very flexible, that people can put money in and take it out on a more flexible basis. And if there’s a difference in how you tax, then there’s an incentive to mess around. So they wanted to avoid that. So if you tax the money coming out on the same basis as you give relief for the money going in, then there’s really not much opportunity to be clever and try to put one over the tax man. So that’s really where that comes from. SIMON BROWN: And you mentioned some of the issues that still need to be ironed out. One of them, I understand, is seeding, because the plan is that this will be money that is added post-implementation, whenever that might be. But in essence, what about the sort of funds … you know, I’m in my fifties, I’ve got a pile of cash already there. What’s the thinking around that, because my understanding was it’s just going to be new money? RICHARD CARTER: And that’s how I hope it actually goes forward. But in there are two quite important details. The first is [about] people closer to retirement. The last time we changed the retirement system people who were closer to retirement were excluded on the rationale, as you said, [that] they’ve already saved. They understand how things are, they’ve done their planning – don’t mess with them right at the end. And so it would make sense for there to be an age limit again. But the more contentious thing is the seeding, which touches on the point you made earlier that it’s going forward, which means it will have, from an access point of view, very little benefit on day one [for] people who don’t have any money in this new system. And so the idea was: well, can’t we transfer some money from the old system into the new system? But that’s horribly complex, and if you get it wrong either in terms of seeding too much money …. and administratively there’s just a lot of complexity around seeding. However, it might be something that is needed in order to get the change over the line. So it’s a thing where we’re watching and waiting to see what comes down. There are definitely some quarters with a very strong preference for an element of seeding. SIMON BROWN: We’ll leave it there. We’ll wait for the budget, which I think is going to be on February 22. Hopefully we’ll get more insights then. Richard Carter, head of Assurance at Allan Gray, I appreciate the early morning. Listen to the full MoneywebNOW podcast every weekday morning here.