The budget presented by Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana on Wednesday managed to achieve the near impossible – providing tax relief to working South Africans while restructuring Eskom’s debt, and all of this in a low-growth economy. “We think this is credit-neutral to slightly positive,” says Investec chief economist Annabel Bishop. “The market was expecting a more negative outcome, and the fact that the government is budgeting for a primary surplus this year and the next three – where income exceeds non-interest spending – explains why the rand strengthened immediately after the budget speech.” For all our detailed and in-depth Budget coverage click here. Achieving a primary surplus is no small feat, but the debt mountain – projected to increase from R4.73 trillion in 2022/23 to R5.84 trillion in 2025/26 (previously to R5.61 trillion in 2025/26) – is growing. Bishop says “this is due to the hefty debt relief offered to Eskom – close to three quarters of the R350 billion guaranteed by the state. “Overall though, SA’s debt ratios place it with the BB- credit rating tier, indicating that the rating agencies still have concerns over SA’s creditworthiness. Debt-servicing costs are now expected to reach R366.8 billion by 2025/6, again pushed up by the relief offered to Eskom.” However, there was good news in the fiscal ratios too, with the budget deficit – originally expected to come in at 4.9% for the current fiscal year – revised lower to 4.2%, falling to 3.2% by 2025/6. “This shows that government is serious about spending restraint and achieving some balance in the budget,” says Bishop. “There are huge spending pressures in areas like public sector wages and social grants, and these will have to be managed in the coming years.” National Treasury is forecasting economic growth of 0.9% for 2023, which is three times the South African Reserve Bank’s target, but within the country’s economists’ consensus range, according to recent Bloomberg and Reuters surveys. Going forward, however, the growth outlook is expected to deteriorate. Treasury is forecasting average growth of 1.4% from 2023 to 2025, compared with 1.6% estimated in October. Bishop says one of the key bottlenecks to economic growth is load shedding. Some R350 billion of Eskom debt is guaranteed by government, and that guarantee expires on 31 March 2023. The decision by Treasury to provide debt relief to the tune of R254 billion will ease pressure on Eskom’s balance sheet. This debt relief for Eskom increases the debt burden on government, as the relief will be spread out over the next three years. “But it is credit-neutral as the key rating agencies already count SA’s state-guaranteed SOE (state-owned entities) debt as part of the total SA debt they rate. “This is part of a wider overhaul of SOEs, and signals an intention by Treasury to unwind contingent liabilities and remove debt guarantees from its balance sheet,” adds Bishop. Public sector spending on infrastructure is expected to exceed R900 billion over the medium term, with roughly half being spent by SOEs, public entities, and through public-private partnerships (PPPs). Some R350 billion will be spent on transport and logistics for road improvements. President Cyril Ramaphosa addressed the need to lift the performance of the country’s rail and ports, and to open rail to third-party operators. Tax relief Government will provide tax relief of R13 billion in 2023/4, and personal income tax brackets will be adjusted for inflation. The threshold before which tax is payable rises from R91 250 to R95 750. There’s also relief for pensioners, who will now be able to withdraw R550 000 tax-free at retirement. “Providing tax relief of R13 billion is commendable in an environment where inflation is high, and it shows that there is a sensitivity to the difficulties being faced by ordinary South Africans,” says Bishop. “To help soften the cost of rising electricity prices, food manufacturers will be able to apply for a refund of the Road Accident Fund levy for the next two years.” There’s also some relief for individuals installing rooftop solar panels, who will be able to claim a rebate of 25% of the cost of the panels after 1 March 2023, up to a maximum of R15 000. Spending growth in line with inflation Spending is budgeted to grow at 4.5% over the coming fiscal year, in line with inflation expectations. Of some concern is the rise in spending on the so-called ‘social wage’ – more than 60% of non-interest expenditure over the medium term goes to the social wage, which includes social grants and the costs of public service delivery such as schools, clinics and hospitals. Some R66 billion is allocated to social development over the medium term, with R36 billion to fund the extension of the Covid-19 Social Relief of Distress grant until 31 March 2024. “Overall, I see this as a rather good outcome for the budget, given the weak economic growth environment we are in, and the pressures for increased spending,” says Bishop. “It could have been worse. This is why we see it as credit-neutral to potentially slightly positive overall.” Read Annabel Bishop’s full analysis of the budget here. Brought to you by Investec. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.