Owner of family restaurant and franchise group, Spur Corporation, is looking forward to healthy earnings for the six months ended December, forecasting almost double that reported in the previous year. Earnings were supported by increased foot traffic at its restaurants as well as by a lower profit base in the previous comparable year. The group, which owns Spur, Panarottis, John Dory’s, RocoMamas as well as speciality brands such as The Hussar Grill, Casa Bella and Nikos, says it expects headline earnings per share (Heps) to rise up to 98% to 138.28 cents. This comes despite businesses in the country facing tough market conditions as a result of Eskom’s energy generation crisis as well as a tougher inflationary environment that is eating away at consumer buying power. “Despite the mounting pressure on disposable income, the group continued to attract customers into restaurants with its distinct and differentiated value proposition,” Spur said in a trading statement on Thursday. “Restaurant brand relevance and appeal, supported by enhanced customer experience, resulted in increased footfall over the period with a peak in December.” According to the group’s business update, the half year period saw a 31.5% growth in sales, led by the speciality brands segment in particular, followed by Spur and Panarottis. “The improved trading performance, together with improved performance by the retail company stores, led to a continued strong recovery in both group revenue and profit.” Read:
Struggling to get chicken at your nearest fast food chain?
KFC SA to close some units due to power cuts Low base Another factor contributing to the group’s seemingly star performance for the period relates to a R22 million tax related dispute it had with the country’s revenue collector which was settled in the Supreme Court of Appeal (SCA) in October 2021. The South African Revenue Service (Sars) according to an update the group released to market in 2021 was in relation to Sars’ issuing of  “additional income tax assessments to the Spur Group in respect of the 2005 to 2021 years of assessment totalling R22.034 million.” “The additional assessments were issued following the disallowance of a deduction claimed in respect of the group’s Share Scheme,” Spur had noted in previous statements. In its most recent update investors, Spur noted that the R22 million once-off tax charge had an impact on the previous comparable year’s reported earnings thus lowering the comparative base for the group’s performance for the current period. “The actual [profit] will grow by above 90% but the underlying profits – if you take into account the low number last year because of this abnormal tax charge – themselves are going up by about 45%,” FNB Wealth and Investments portfolio manager Wayne McCurrie explains to Moneyweb. Despite the impact of the tax charge however, McCurrie still believes that Spur’s performance remains strong. The market reacted positively to the group’s update, with the stock jumping 7% higher during morning trade and levelling out at almost 4% higher after lunchtime.