 You can also listen to this podcast on iono.fm here. FIFI PETERS: We’re sticking with the power story and the impact it’s not only having on agriculture, but … on the property sector. In today’s property feature we’ve got Growthpoint joining us to talk to us about how it is powering its tenants across its shopping malls and its offices and its industrial parks [during] load shedding, and exactly what this is costing it. Estienne de Klerk, the CEO of Growthpoint of South Africa joins us. Estienne, thanks so much for your time. Great to speak with you for the first time in 2023. ESTIENNE DE KLERK: Thanks, Fifi, and all the best for the year. FIFI PETERS: Same to you. I wish we were talking of lighter matters, but of course it is a dark matter – not even intending a pun there – that we’re speaking about. But tell us how you are trying to keep the lights on for your tenants, and exactly what this means for you. ESTIENNE DE KLERK: I think Growthpoint has obviously been in the trenches on this issue since 2008, when the first power challenges faced the industry broadly. We started rolling out generators initially and, as the electricity prices moved up, solar became very feasible. Subsequently we’ve installed over 13.5MW of peak-demand solar on our buildings. So that was a sort of key strategy. Listen: COO Engelbert Binedell on how Growthpoint is dealing with load shedding (July 2022) Clearly with government lifting the regulations in terms of the capacity per plant above one megawatt, it really has opened the door for the real estate industry to be a little more on the front foot in rolling out solar across our whole portfolio. So that really, I think, is a positive story for the country and for our clients – and clearly for the environment. We do have a strategy to ultimately be net-zero around 2050. In the short term we are doing absolutely the best we can to ensure that our clients at our buildings, most of our buildings, have total power support. So if you are in a Growthpoint office today and the power goes out, let’s say, three or four times a day, then you still have the benefit of having your lights working, your computers and electronics working. That does improve the quality of the service we can provide our clients ultimately at the buildings. But as you pointed out, it does come at a bit of a cost. FIFI PETERS: Which is? I suppose added to that question, who is paying for that entire cost? ESTIENNE DE KLERK: It does vary. I think just to put some numbers to it, Growthpoint has quite a significant portfolio. We have a retail portfolio that spans over 40-odd properties and then an office portfolio of 190-odd properties and an industrial portfolio of a similar size. In aggregate you’ve got about 5.5 million square metres of space. Now, to keep all that going we’ve got, as I pointed out earlier, 13.5MW of solar installed, but also 332MW of generation installed. That doesn’t include the V&A, which in itself has currently 2MW of solar installed, and they’re looking to expand that to 4MW in this coming period. They’ve 48 generators which generate close to 24MW. That initial investment clearly is for us as Growthpoint – or for the Victoria and Alfred Waterfront in that specific case. Ultimately that is built into the rental generally. Then what we do is we try and share the cost in respect of the actual ongoing utilisation with our tenants, where possible. So I would say we are generally recovering only about 60% of the cost and, in most of our retail portfolio we don’t recover any of it. Ultimately the shareholders of Growthpoint bear the cost. But the flip side of that is it is ensuring that our tenants remain sustainable, [which is] similar to what the real estate industry did during Covid, where we provided our clients with significant discounts which ultimately benefited the clients as well as the municipalities in our country and the banks. The industry became the ‘ham in the sandwich’ there. So it has been quite an interesting couple of years if you add Covid to a tough economy, with the [KZN] riots and increasing interest rates. So not seven generous years for property, but I think the industry has proved to be quite resilient. It is the largest industry in the country and, as such, the people in the industry have actually been quite creative in ensuring that their clients remain operating and sustainable. FIFI PETERS: Just briefly, do you have an ask for the president ahead of the State of the Nation Address later, which could make it a little easier for your industry? Seven years of hardship? I’m sure you’re wanting a bit of a break at this stage. ESTIENNE DE KLERK: Yes. What I heard in the previous interview certainly does resonate. I think the private sector will certainly be able to resolve the capacity problems in the country. From, let’s say, a Growthpoint perspective, to the extent that we had access to the grid where we could transmit into the grid and ensure that the power safely gets to our clients or to our buildings, we would’ve developed that capacity over the past years. But this is primarily a regulatory-induced crisis as far as I’m concerned, and I think what we do need is action. Certainly some of the plans in terms of unbundling the components of the utility – being generation, transmission and distribution – will be a very big step in the right direction because that will provide the generators the ability to produce and supply into the networks. And if those generators ultimately sign up clients directly, that will certainly take the pressure off the utility to collect their rental, because the private sector certainly is quite efficient in ensuring their businesses are sustainable and that, when they make investments, those investments operate and deliver at least close to the spec that they [were] originally designed [for], otherwise they would’ve been out of business a long time ago. FIFI PETERS: Point taken. Estienne, thanks so much for your time joining us on this week’s property feature. Estienne de Klerk, CEO of Growthpoint South Africa, has been counting the numbers as to how much Growthpoint pays to keep the lights on. Listen to the SAfm Market Update with Moneyweb, here.