JSE-listed pharmaceutical manufacturer Adcock Ingram says the latest single exit price adjustment (SEPA) of 3.28% approved for the current financial year is disappointingly low and will not compensate the manufacturer for the cost pressures it is having to battle with. The SEPA is a price set by pharmaceutical manufacturers which dictates the price at which medicines may be sold for, despite the volumes sold. The SEPA includes in its determination both Vat and logistics fees. The medicine manufacturer raised its concerns in the group’s interim results statement for the financial period ending 31 December, on Tuesday. “While we are confident that the strength of the group’s broad and affordable portfolio of well-known brands will continue to withstand many of the macroeconomic challenges in South Africa, the low single exit price adjustment (SEPA) of 3.28% granted to the industry in the current calendar year will not compensate for the abnormal cost increases in certain raw materials and packaging, the weak currency, and above inflationary increases in wages and utilities,” CEO Andy Hall said. Read: Adcock Ingram reports full-year profit bump Post-Covid normalisation For the six-month reporting period, Adcock Ingram says it has seen a steady performance in its key metrics. However, against the backdrop of the boom in pharmaceutical product sales seen during the Covid-19 pandemic, the group says it has noted a relative slowdown in product sales. A trend that aligns with the slowdown in Covid-19 infections. Adcock Ingram manufactures pharmaceutical products like Panado, Allergex, Citro-Soda, Corenza C and Bioplus. Turnover for the period increased by 8% to R4.7 billion, while gross profit increased by 8% to R1.6 billion and trading profit came in 15% stronger, increasing by R623 million. Headline earnings per share (Heps) rose by 20% this period to 290 cents. Adcock further declared an interim dividend of 125 cents per share, a 20% increase from that declared in the previous period. “Organic volumes declined marginally, due to the normalisation of Panado demand, following the exceptional sales generated in the comparative period from the Covid-19 vaccination campaigns, lower ARV tender sales and reduced demand for other products used in relation to Covid-19,”Adcock said. “In aggregate, these declines were well compensated for by good demand in the OTC and Prescription portfolios.” “The gross margin for the six months remained relatively stable as a more favourable product sales mix and price increases realised in the non-SEP regulated portfolios, mitigated the cost impact arising from the weaker exchange rate, increased production costs and significant cost-push from suppliers, locally as well as from abroad,” the group said. Read: Bidvest and the joys of diversification