Natascha Viljoen, the CEO of JSE-listed mining giant Anglo American Platinum, has decided to resign from her position to pursue the chief operating officer role at US-based mining company Newmont Corporation. Amplats informed investors of Viljoen’s departure via a Sens announcement on Wednesday. The outgoing CEO, who took up the position in April 2020, is expected to serve a 12-month notice period before making her departure official. It seems the market is not taking the news of Viljoen’s departure well, this as the miner’s share price dropped by almost 4% in early morning trade on Wednesday as the market processed the news. Leaving the share hovering above the R1 185 mark. “Being part of the Anglo American family in various ways over decades has been a privilege. It is a company that afforded me opportunities to learn and grow that I will forever be grateful for,” Viljoen said in a statement. “At Anglo American Platinum, my executive team and I have built a very strong leadership group who are aligned with our values and will continue to shape the business and its growth to deliver on our strategic and operational priorities for the next stage of our performance improvement journey. “While I have identified the next phase of my career, my commitment to delivering our clear objectives during this year is as firm as ever, beginning, of course, with keeping our people safe, every day,” Viljoen added. Read: Anglo says payouts to decline as SA power outages hit Amplat board chairman Norman Mbazima wished Viljoen well on her appointment with Newmont Corporation and informed investors that the process to appoint a successor has officially begun. “Natascha has been leading Anglo American Platinum with enormous skill and dedication, transforming the company’s value creation trajectory. Read: Impala Platinum half-year refined output hit by worsening power cuts “We are grateful that she will continue to do so for much of this year. We congratulate Natascha and the process to identify her successor is now underway,” Mbazima said. Listen: Fifi Peters speaks to Exness senior financial analyst Terence Hove about the top mining shares to watch out for in 2023: You can also listen to the episode here.