Taxpayers walk something of a tight rope when they enter into a dispute process with the South African Revenue Service (Sars) that may ultimately end up in tax court. A recent case before the Tax Court in Cape Town highlighted the importance of alignment between the initial grounds for objection and the introduction of new grounds during the appeal. The devil is in the detail, says Cliffe Dekker Hofmeyr associate designate Nicholas Carroll. In its January tax and exchange control alert, Carroll looks at a case where the new grounds of appeal the taxpayer wanted to rely on were not allowed. The case In this case the taxpayer declared gross income of R320.8 million and claimed R73.2 million in expense deductions for the 2018 tax year. The claimed deductions included R11 million that related to the distribution of profits paid to a related party. Sars disallowed the R11 million, the taxpayer objected to the additional assessment, the objection was disallowed, and the taxpayer turned to the tax court. The taxpayer said in the notice of appeal that it was only appealing the disallowance of the R11 million deduction. However, it added a new ground of appeal, in the alternative, stating that the amount should never have formed part of the gross income as it was never received by the taxpayer. The rules In terms of the appeal rules in the Tax Administration Act, a taxpayer may introduce new grounds of appeal if the substance of the initial objection and the new grounds of appeal are the same. This was confirmed in another case (Tax Court, ITC 1912). The court held that a taxpayer is entitled to raise a new ground provided that it relates to an amount (or part thereof) in the assessment that had been placed in dispute by the objection. In the November decision the court found that the new ground of appeal related to the gross income amount and not the expense amount that was initially objected to. Carroll says the court found that the new ground was not a “re-packaging” of its original ground of objection and therefore did not fall within the ambit of the rules. New grounds, two schools of thought Nico Theron, founder of Unicus Tax Specialists SA and an expert on tax objections and appeals, says it often happens that when the objection fails taxpayers bring in the “heavy guns”. The “fresh pair of eyes” realises that the wrong issue was objected to and must then try to find ways of introducing new grounds of appeal without having to start afresh. It is possible to raise new grounds, but in some instances the new grounds will be permissible and in other instances it will not, he says. He says there are two schools of thought on what is permissible and what is not. The one school of thought is that if the taxpayer wants to raise something in the appeal that was not raised in the objection it will not be permissible. “In my opinion this is the wrong school of thought. This is based on the old set of rules that did not explain clearly what is permissible and what is not. “The new set of rules is far clearer on what is permissible new grounds and what is not,” says Theron. In terms of the new rules it is permissible to raise any new grounds related to the matter raised in the objection on appeal. He gives an example where Sars disallows travel expenses claimed by a company. The company lodges an objection and sets out the reasons why it is allowed to claim the expenses. The objection is disallowed, and the taxpayer takes it on appeal before the tax court. Theron says the taxpayer is allowed to raise “any other legal issue or fact pertaining to the travel expenses” to show that they are deductible. In other words, the taxpayer can expand on their initial grounds of objection. However, should the taxpayer now raise issues pertaining to income that should not have been taxed this will not be permissible as a new ground since the taxpayer never objected to the income assessment. The objection related to the disallowed travel expenses. Theron explains that this does not necessarily mean the taxpayer cannot lodge an objection against the income tax assessment. The problem is that it may be outside the timelines allowed for the lodging of an objection, he adds. Food for thought Carroll writes in the tax and exchange control alert that although a taxpayer is “as a rule” not permitted to raise new grounds of objection on appeal, the exception is where a new ground is so close to the original ground of objection that these grounds are the same in substance. “Provided a taxpayer remains within these lines, this can be a valuable tool where a ground was not originally raised in an objection.”