SAA’s preferred bidder and strategic equity partner (SEP) is disappointed that the R1 billion further bailout in the Budget for the national airline constitutes only “partial fulfilment of government’s commitment to settle the airline’s historical debt”. Takatso Aviation, which was announced as the preferred bidder and SAA’s SEP in 2021, said this historical debt was initially quantified at around R13.5 billion. It said the bulk of this has already been settled, but the budgeted R1 billion will settle some, but not all of the outstanding amount. “It therefore falls short of what it would have taken for government to completely clear this obligation, which is one of the conditions for the finalisation of the SAA Transaction with the SEP,” said Takatso Aviation Director Lizeka Matshekga. However, Takatso reiterated its commitment to seeing the transaction to finality and indicated it is currently engaging with the Competition Commission to finalise the merger clearance. For all our detailed and in depth Budget coverage click here. Matshekga added that the partial fulfilment of this debt obligation is not what Takatso Aviation had expected. “We will therefore have to assess the impact thereof on progress of the transaction. “The unease Takatso Aviation funders have with signing-off on the release of the funds we’re mobilising for our R3 billion commitment to SAA, while the outstanding BRP (business rescue practitioners) debt subsists, is an issue we have highlighted time and again. “Part of the context for this unease is the well-known fact that this debt burden stems from SAA’s past financial distress. “We therefore need to assess whether a partial fulfilment of government’s undertaking to clear this debt changes anything, in our financing process.” Takatso said it is currently in ongoing engagements with government for an appraisal on the current situation about the final settlement of its outstanding financing obligations emanating from the BRP. “We look forward to more discussions with government in the coming weeks, on the BRP obligations issue, as well as the other conditions still to be fulfilled to accelerate the transaction to finality.” But Takatso emphasised that “time is of the essence if the parties to the are to seize the current moment characterized by a buoyant aviation sector”. “Takatso Aviation is looking forward to building SAA up as an agile, sustainable, and commercially viable African airline, that will stimulate and transform the aviation sector, while also flying the South African flag high. The 2023 Budget Review said the allocation to SAA is to assist the airline’s business rescue process, adding that to exit business rescue, a settlement agreement was reached between the rescue practitioners and the airline’s creditors providing for a gradual payment of historical debts. For all our detailed and in depth Budget coverage click here. “Consequently, an additional R1 billion will be allocated during 2022/23 to assist with these outstanding obligations, with additional funding to be considered subject to strict conditions to allow the strategic equity partnership deal to be finalised,” it said. “As a condition of such funding, all government guarantees to SAA will be cancelled.” SAA exited business rescue in April 2021 and restarted domestic and regional operations. However, Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana said SAA has not submitted financial statements for the most recent year. He added that government has significantly reduced its contingent liability exposure to SAA, and it is expected that the airline will no longer require government guarantees by the end of 2022/23. Other SOE support The South African Post Office received a R2.4 billion bailout in the Budget to implement its turnaround plan, which will reduce contingent liabilities. The  budget review also reported that government has been developing a new framework for managing bailouts to state-owned enterprises (SOEs) to reduce fiscal risks and promote long-overdue reforms. Land Bank The review said the Land Bank remains in financial distress and the process to finalise a solution is ongoing. “The R5 billion that was retained in the 2022/23 contingency reserve in the 2022 MTBPS (Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement) will be allocated to the Land Bank with conditions attached to its use,” it said. The review said the Land Bank has been in default since failing to meet its debt obligations in April 2020 and discussions with its lenders are ongoing. “Despite this, the entity has improved its financial position. Net profit for 2021/22 was R1.4 billion, compared to a net loss of R747 million in 2020/21. “This resulted from actions taken to address poorly performing investments and a decrease in administrative fees,” it said. The review added that following a qualified audit opinion and a disclaimer audit opinion received in the two previous financial years, the Land Bank implemented a remedial action plan and received an unqualified audit opinion with no findings from the Auditor-General for 2021/22. However, the Auditor-General did note uncertainty about its status as a going concern due to the debt default, it said. Denel Denel remains financially distressed and unable to fulfil its financial obligations and has not submitted annual financial statements for the year, Godongwana said. Denel was allocated R3.4 billion through the 2022 Special Appropriation Act with set conditions relating to the implementation of its turnaround plan and clarity on a sustainable business model. “These funds can only be disbursed if Denel substantially meets the conditions before the end of March 2023. Government is closely monitoring this situation,” it said. Transnet The review added that National Treasury will assess Transnet’s freight corridors and associated port operations during 2023/24 to identify interventions that should be implemented to improve operations and ensure that freight infrastructure is used optimally. This follows the 2022 Special Appropriation Act providing Transnet with R2.9 billion to accelerate locomotive repair and maintenance. The review said concerns remain regarding Transnet’s ability to service the current demand for cargo transportation on the freight system and keep pace with tonnage growth. The 2022 Adjustments Appropriation Act provided an additional R2.9 billion to Transnet to restore infrastructure damage caused during the April 2022 floods in KwaZulu-Natal and this work is under way, it said. The review stressed that if South Africa is to have a reliable, cost-effective and safe freight system, port and rail infrastructure, it requires large-scale investment. It added that following historical underinvestment, Transnet now plans to increase capital investment spending over the next five years to address a maintenance backlog and increase the capacity of existing infrastructure. “Some progress has been made to enable private-sector participation and access to the rail network. “This is part of a broader shift away from a divisional, modal service offering to a more strategic collaborative approach. “It will enable Transnet to participate in integrated commodity value chains, and work with the private sector to grow the investment portfolio in a financially sustainable manner, while unlocking new revenue streams,” the finance minister said. The review noted that Transnet, in January 2023, issued a request for quotations for private-sector participation on its container corridor between Johannesburg and Durban. Framework for managing bailouts The review said the preliminary framework for managing bailouts will be published in March 2023 for consultation and will thereafter be submitted to cabinet for approval. “It aims to link bailouts of these entities to a range of reforms needed to make them sustainable and efficient. “In the meantime, government has taken certain steps to reduce fiscal risks from public entities and state-owned companies. “Higher-than-anticipated revenues have been used to provide conditional short-term support, while a major debt-relief arrangement for Eskom will relieve extreme pressure on the utility’s balance sheet, enabling it to undertake the necessary maintenance and investment.” The financial and operational performance of major public entities has deteriorated over the years largely due to weak corporate governance, archaic business models and burdensome cost structures. It said the total debt maturing of public entities over the medium term is expected to amount to R74.7 billion, of which 17%, or R12.5 billion, is guaranteed by government. Contingent liabilities arising from state-owned companies have risen from R84.4 billion in 2008/09 to R478.5 billion in 2022/23.