I’m on retirement and wish to know if I can draw additional funds from my existing provident fund to settle my bond. Please can you advise?  Dear reader, Assuming you are already drawing from this investment as you mention you are retired already, I would like to make the assumption that you have already utilised your once-off withdrawal when you reached retirement. At that stage you were allowed to take up to one third of the fund value (with only the first R500 000 tax-free unless you had excess roll-over contributions; benefit allowed under Section 10C of the Income Tax Act). The remaining two thirds then transfer to a living annuity where you earn a monthly income. This product is quite restrictive as you can earn an income between 2.5% and 17.5%, and this can only be amended annually on the anniversary date of your investment. If this is the scenario in your situation, then no, you will only be able to increase your monthly income, but you won’t be able to withdraw a lump sum/larger value. These monthly drawings are taxed on the income tax scale. The second scenario is that you have taken your allowed withdrawal and reinvested the remainder of the funds into a provident preservation fund. If the initial withdrawal was taken before preserving the funds, you will be allowed to make one more partial/full withdrawal. If you took one withdrawal from the preservation fund, no additional withdrawal will be allowed as you only have one lifetime withdrawal. It’s important to note here one withdrawal can be taken before transferring to a preservation fund, and then one withdrawal while within it. Then retirement is compulsory. The important thing if you follow the withdrawal route is that the tax table differs from the retirement tax table. The withdrawal sliding scale is quite harsh. The first R25 000 will be tax-free, whereafter a sliding scale applies. By taking your initial withdrawal you would have utilised the tax-free component. If you choose to retire you qualify for a different sliding scale. A much friendlier one. The first R500 000 will be tax-free whereafter a sliding scale applies. Should you opt for the retirement route, you will not be allowed to withdraw in full. Then the one-third withdrawal, two-thirds reinvestment principle applies. And the two-thirds component will be reinvested within a living annuity (recommended route), and a monthly income earned. This is however a topic that is quite popular among investors and I believe it’s a very relevant topic to discuss. In most scenarios I wouldn’t recommend delving into your investment portfolio to settle a bond. Yes, the ideal situation at retirement is to be without debt. Yet it’s imperative to keep in mind that you will still require a portfolio to provide you with an income, increasing with inflation annually, for probably another 30 years. It doesn’t help much having a paid-off bond but your portfolio is not providing sufficient income. Including all asset classes leads to a resilient portfolio, and this means not only prioritising your property (where a primary residence is technically not an asset as you can’t rent it out, and possibly not even sell it overnight), but also the assets that an investment portfolio will consist of: cash, bonds, listed property, local and offshore equity exposure. This decision also needs to be weighed with market cycles. Where are we in interest rate cycles compared to market returns? If the market is outperforming the rate you are paying on the bond, it simply doesn’t make sense to lose the above-inflation returns you are enjoying in your portfolio. There will be certain cycles, where interest rates are high and equity returns low, where this can be prioritised. I wouldn’t recommend having an all-or-nothing approach however, as the benefit of compound interest in an investment portfolio carries great value. The graph below displays the benefit of compound interest over time.  These decisions throughout different cycles can be managed with the advice of a wealth advisor. Ensuring you are making the best of the different worlds – at the right time. 