<span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> You can also listen to this podcast on iono.fm here. SIMON BROWN: I’m chatting with Tafadzwa Chibanguza, chief operating officer at the Steel and Engineering Industries Federation of Southern Africa. Tafadzwa, I appreciate the time today. A recent presentation by you and your colleagues [showed] a bunch of data, but perhaps the point that stood out for me the most was that since the financial crisis of 2008/2009 the sector has actually contracted at an annual basis of 1.2% a year, and investment has remained considerably weak. This is a part of our economy which is critically important but really having a tough decade-plus. TAFADZWA CHIBANGUZA: Very true, Simon. Thanks for having us. It has just been downward for the sector and, when you go to that number that you mentioned, a 1.2% contraction on a compound annual basis…. What this sector is and what it represents, Simon, is the heartbeat of industrialisation, if you like. The real economy, what is happening in the underlying components of the economy, reflects through the sector. The sector forms 26% of manufacturing and supplies input into mining, construction, the auto, petrochem[icals] and agriculture sectors as well. It just talks to a general slow deterioration of the fundamentals. Basically what the sector is, is a proxy of that. Unfortunately – I know we might get into it – the picture remains the same, even into the next year and some of the numbers that we’ve put out in terms of what we’re looking out at. SIMON BROWN: We’ll get to the future in a moment and what’s key there. You mentioned the different sectors. This is the backbone of our economy in many senses. TAFADZWA CHIBANGUZA: Very true. Steel is at the heart of everything. And then [it] also represents the steel and engineering value chain, which is a very important part because, in essence, after mining it is the beneficiary of that steel, right through to [all] engineering. Hence the output product, of course, that comes out of the sector is in essence supplied into all those industries that I’ve mentioned and, of course, whether we export quite a bit of it, about 40% of total sales. SIMON BROWN: A lot came out of the pandemic. One of the key points was supply chains. Globally supply chains suddenly ground to a halt. That just-in-time supply chain showed its fragility in many ways, and we are seeing a lot of organisations moving to what I almost call ‘just-in-case’ – in other words, more local, closer to market. Is that opportunity? Is that something that could potentially benefit us or does that actually maybe put some pressure on our exports? TAFADZWA CHIBANGUZA: Not at all. In fact, we highlight this point in the report as well. What we have – and at this point it is anecdotal – Covid was about two-and-a-half years ago, so we are looking at two data points to confirm that. But also anecdotal comments and conversations with our members have actually indicated that they are seeing their order books from local clients also starting to increase. From a business risk-mitigation point of view because of Covid, we know that makes sense, and [we would] rather have those domestic relationships with our members who supply those products at least already having bedded down so that you are not caught off-guard looking at lengthy supply chains and external. But more important than that, Simon, is also the policy – and here now we’re looking to the state policy – has a very real opportunity to play, to entrench those already underlying trends. Covid hastened a lot, I think across many areas, even just out of the industrial sort of space, a lot of things that would’ve taken many years. And now, because that is already something that we see as an underlying trend induced by Covid, policy has a real opportunity to induce and capitalise on that opportunity. SIMON BROWN: I take that point. Covid did lots, and a lot of what it did in many different places was to sort of accelerate what was already a trend happening. If we look forward, to me the amateur standing here, I see two major challenges – actually maybe three. It’s a global economy which is going to be weaker, and then of course Eskom and Transnet in the local space; none of these are making life easy in the sector. TAFADZWA CHIBANGUZA: Very true. In fact, the estimate that we put out – and that’s our base case – [is that] the 2.2% contraction is really a function of the demand and the supply side coming together as a perfect storm. And I mean that in the negative of course, and really the demand side is weak. As I mentioned, 40% of our total output is exported and, of that, 40% is also exported into Africa, mainly sub-Saharan Africa. And we know [that], with global financing conditions becoming much tighter [in] those countries, like we saw happened recently in Ghana, the fiscal vulnerabilities then are exposed in the current environment. So that’s a big part of our export book where we have seaborne trade. Asia and Europe also make up quite a considerable amount. Then we already know Transnet. We’ve built into that estimate quite a punitive assumption around Transnet’s capability to take our product on the seaborne side. And then domestically, of course, the biggest headwind is the energy crisis. That has immediate and long-term implications [for] investability. But also, given that this sector is a productive sector in the sense that electricity is a key component to production, that is a headwind informing the outlook. So on both sides, Simon. SIMON BROWN: Yes. Eskom of course impacts cost, but utilisation gets hurt at the same time. Neither is good for a sector that’s had a tough time since as far back as 2008. We’ll leave it there, Tafadzwa. I really appreciate the time. Tafadzwa Chibanguza is chief operating officer at the Steel and Engineering Industries Federation of Southern Africa. Listen to the full MoneywebNOW podcast every weekday morning here.