In the finance world, there is an active versus passive debate that has raged for some time. Proponents and detractors of both sides of the argument bring academic studies and comparisons to the table to make their case for where investors – institutional or individual – should place their money. Should you invest in actively managed portfolios, where a professional money manager or team of experts makes decisions to buy, hold and sell – or in passive funds that track a market-weighted index or portfolio? Roland Gräbe, head of Old Mutual Tailored Fund Portfolios, joins the debate from a different angle, pleading the case of both – as long as the benchmarks and measurements used to evaluate the performance of each are accurate and relevant. “I am not arguing that there is no place for active asset management in South Africa,” says Gräbe. “However, I think people are underestimating the challenge of deriving value from active management selection and the biggest problem here is the measurement of active managers’ performance.” On average, active management incurs higher fees than investing in a passive fund tracker. Individual investors might start asking questions if they do not see the returns they expect. If you are an advisor, accurately understanding the performance of the fund managers that you’ve chosen to manage your clients’ portfolios should be a priority, says Gräbe. To be able to do this, benchmarking is imperative. Using a benchmark provides a point of comparison to show whether real investment alpha (that additional return above the benchmark) is achieved. Different benchmarking approaches could be used. The most common is to compare actively managed funds against a readily available market index. However, Gräbe argues for a certain level of customisation when choosing or creating these market indices to ensure that apples are indeed compared with apples. Benchmarking mistakes When measuring active managers and the value they bring, the first mistake you could make is simply throwing them all together in one pool and comparing them to the market and each other. This, says Gräbe, does not take the nuance of each portfolio and the investment approach of the different managers into consideration. He believes true assessment of active managers’ performance should consider style bias. For example, fund managers with a value bias will buy value stocks or operate in a specific section of the market where they believe the stocks are cheap. “If you measure that manager’s performance it should be measured against a benchmark that has been crafted to reflect the average performance of other value investors because that is the universe in which that manager operates.” If you follow this approach and a value manager, for example, is measured against a benchmark that is also tilted towards value, that is when you finally see real alpha, says Gräbe. “That is when you know if the manager is better at picking value stocks versus the ‘Vanilla Value Index’.” Another mistake, argues Gräbe, is when people try and gauge the short-term consistency of an active manager. “I don’t think active managers try to sell short-term consistency. To produce sustained or sustainable outperformance over multiple cycles you must be inconsistent in your short-term performance.” It can’t be a hands-off approach for advisors In the investment world, discretionary fund managers (DFMs) offer peace of mind to advisors when they bring their expertise in portfolio construction and fund management so that the advisor can focus on providing advice. However, advisors cannot renege on their responsibility completely. They need to keep the chosen DFM accountable and be sure to ask difficult questions to understand the approach taken and the results delivered. “I think advisors will know they’ve done well in choosing when the knowledge gap that exists between the advisor and the DFM shrinks over time,” says Gräbe. “An investor should, firstly, learn and benefit from the knowledge of the advisor. “And the advisor, the more time they spend with the DFM asking questions and gaining a better understanding, should grow in their own investment insights.” What does balance look like? First off, there is a very clear need for active fund management in the world of investing, simply because without active fund managers there wouldn’t be a market. The supply and demand dynamics of active fund management determine the price of stocks, which serves as the basis for trackers to work. You have no market without buyers and sellers. What would happen if active fund management did not exist? “Luckily that has remained an academic debate and we are far from truly seeing what that would mean,” says Gräbe. “I do, however, think that within South Africa we are still a little bit too obsessed with active management – for a few reasons.” Firstly, says Gräbe, the active management market in South Africa is still very concentrated among the few large players, with a lot of smaller niche managers struggling to break through. “The danger here is that the South African support for active management is not necessarily evidence of actual alpha being achieved, but more of brand loyalty and marketing power,” he says. “That is why I argue for appropriate measurement so that clients really understand if they are getting value for money.” Old Mutual Tailored Fund Portfolios has significant exposure to active fund managers, says Gräbe, but invests a lot of time in careful and customised benchmarking to ensure that truly great managers are selected. And then, to balance the risk inherent in those portfolios and the short-term underperformance that could happen in some market cycles, with passive index inclusions. “An allocation to some index trackers lowers your overall costs and gives you a market return to anchor to. For me, the key thing is that by holding some index funds you buy yourself patience within active management as it will buffer you against that out- and underperformance, and allows you to live through the inconsistency of active managers because you will not find one that will outperform for you every year.” Sophisticated indexation An index tracker today is also a lot more nuanced than it was 10 years ago. “The business of indexation has undergone an evolution of its own,” says Gräbe. We’ve seen the movement from the simplicity of the early index funds in the late 1970s to the advent of exchange-traded funds (ETFs) in the 1990s. The latter gave investors the ability to buy and sell shares in real time and made passive index investing more accessible to individual investors. Smart beta funds mark a new era in index investing, with alternative index construction helping to achieve exposure to specific market segments and investment styles, such as the value argument highlighted above. Customised indexing has led to the creation of, for example, funds that focus on environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors. And now that we are entering the era of artificial intelligence (AI) and robo-advice, some AI or machine-learning-powered tracker funds have seen the light (such as the AI Powered Equity ETF listed on the New York Stock Exchange). “We will, over time, see index funds that make for interesting products, but that also makes for fantastic benchmarks,” says Gräbe. “If we use a fair ruler, we will get closer to truly making the best investment decisions we can in a dynamic market environment.” Brought to you by Old Mutual Wealth. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.