While Covid-19 and the associated lockdowns are in the rearview mirror, the distortions they created are still working their way through the market. Indeed, in some instances, there remain some so-called ‘reopening trades’ on the table that are yet to report. The latest sales and trading update from Spur Corp reveals sales that are still recovering to pre-Covid levels while profits are actually ahead. More granularly, while Spur’s H1:23 revenue is expected to be sequentially higher by 21.1% from the prior six-month period (H2:22), this is still about 16% lower than the period immediately before the pandemic (July 2019 to December 2019). Yet, when we take the mid-point of Spur’s H1:23 diluted headline earnings per share (Heps) guidance – 136.55 cents per share (cps) – profit is a little over 9% higher than the equivalent Heps from H1:20. To borrow from Scaling Up co-author Alan Miltz, revenue is vanity, profits are sanity (and cash flow is reality, but we don’t know this figure yet). Thus I would argue that Spur is a better business than it was pre-Covid. But its share price remains below pre-Covid levels. Why? Previously I noted that the domestic hospital groups stand to benefit from Covid retreating and pent-up demand for high-margin electives coming back to their theatres. Life Healthcare’s latest update – among other details – noted how its southern African business saw strong recovery in activity levels with admissions up 14% year on year (y/y), paid patient days up 13% y/y and occupancies rising from 55% to 62%. Generally speaking, hotels and hospital really start to make good money as their occupancies rise above 60%. While Mediclinic’s imminent delisting sterilises its potential for us, Netcare still offers a clean entry point into the domestic hospital market and, indeed, one that is still to report its latest numbers. Yet, much like Life Healthcare, its share price remains below its pre-Covid levels. Why? Next up, we have the entire life insurance sector. I wrote previously on this sector’s recovery and I will reiterate that Momentum Metropolitan and Sanlam both remain with share prices below their pre-Covid levels. Read: There’s life in the life insurers Momentum Metropolitan is on an exceptionally juicy discount against its embedded value (EV), likely being boosted even higher by its current share buyback programme, and we are expecting some good numbers out from this company in early March. Yet Momentum Metropolitan’s share price remains below pre-Covid levels. Why? Another reopening trade to watch is Tsogo Gaming. I previously noted how this casino and gaming group should exit the pandemic better than it entered it, and while we are yet to see the latest numbers, I stand by this view. Read: Tsogo Sun Gaming beating the odds Yet Tsogo Gaming’s share price is effectively flat against pre-Covid share price. Why? An argument could be made that valuations should be lower than pre-Covid. The SA Reserve Bank repo rate is now 7.25% versus its pre-Covid level of 6.25%, thus lowering valuations in the economy. Likewise, load shedding is now a feature of everyday life along with big corporate diesel bills that should eat into margins. Read:
Life Healthcare surges 13% on potential offer for its AMG business
SA’s retail and fast-food giants demand tax relief from government
Shoprite staring down a R1bn-plus annual diesel bill Yet neither argument takes into account that smaller businesses have been worse affected by the last two years. Indeed, many of the well-run big corporates have gained market share over this period as small competitors fell over. Tragic, but also a reality benefitting the larger listed stocks. Thus, the logic is simple: where companies are in better shape than they were before the pandemic, it makes no sense for the market to be valuing them lower than pre-Covid. Herein lies the potential for upside. Keith McLachlan is chief investment officer at Integral Asset Management. * Integral Asset Management may hold Spur, Netcare and Momentum Metropolitan shares in portfolios it manages on behalf of clients.