Insurance giant Sanlam has concluded two separate agreements that will see it fully control BrightRock, as well as merge the operations of Sanlam Trust with that of insurer, wills and estates specialist Capital Legacy. Sanlam said it spent R1.1 billion from its discretionary capital for the transactions, saying the move will bolster its retail life insurance operations in the country. The deals are not expected to have a significant impact on the group’s discretionary capital, which remains strong, Sanlam added. Listen/Read: Brightrock hits R4.3bn in total life insurance payouts BrightRock Sanlam said it has purchased the remaining shares it didn’t already own (38%) in BrightRock, for an initial payment of R399 million, effectively buying it out to fully bring it into the Sanlam stable. Before taking full control of the business, Sanlam owned a 62% stake in BrightRock, and it expects to make further payments of between R95 million and R437 million over the next three years, provided the value of new business targets are met, Sanlam said. Sanlam said BrightRock had grown significantly since it first acquired shares in the business in 2017, and has managed to deliver an average operational return on group equity value (RoGEV) of 21.5% – significantly ahead of the insurer’s hurdle rate. While BrightRock will continue to operate under its own brand, and with its own management team and distribution, some functions will be carried out by Sanlam Life once the business is transferred to the insurer’s licence, it said. Sanlam Retail Affluent CEO Anton Gildenhuys said: “Sanlam and BrightRock’s offerings combined have the largest market share of new retail risk sales in the independent broker market, according to the latest NMG market share survey. We are pleased to have contributed to BrightRock’s success since becoming a shareholder in 2017 and we now believe the opportunity is right to realise future growth prospects through owning 100% of the business.” The transaction remains subject to regulatory approval and is expected to be implemented in 2023’s second quarter. Capital Legacy The Capital Legacy deal will see Sanlam Life disposing of Sanlam Trust to Capital Legacy for R390 million, in exchange for shares in Capital Legacy. This will essentially create an enlarged Capital Legacy business that will be Sanlam branded and will offer wills and estate products to Sanlam’s clients. Sanlam Private Wealth Fiduciary Services and Sanlam Corporate’s Beneficiary Fund,  are, however, not part of the proposed transaction and will remain with Sanlam, the company said. Sanlam already has an indirect shareholding in Capital Legacy, through its 25% shareholding in African Rainbow Capital Financial Services Investments (ARC FSI). The company said Sanlam Life will also subscribe for further shares in Capital Legacy, for a cash amount of R720 million, which will translate to Sanlam owning a 26% interest in the enlarged Capital Legacy Group which will include Sanlam Trust. The management teams of Capital Legacy and Sanlam Trust will continue to run the combined business, with Capital Legacy’s management owners remaining shareholders. Gildenhuys commented: “We admire the innovative solutions that Capital Legacy has created, the agile and best in class technology as well as the comprehensive marketing infrastructure they have built – all of which supports their phenomenal growth. “Combining the market-leading capabilities in Sanlam Trust with those at Capital Legacy will create a brilliant organisation that will be able to support all current and future clients in their endeavours to live with confidence.” The transaction remains subject to approvals from the Reserve Bank’s Prudential Authority and the Financial Sector Conduct Authority (FSCA), as well as regulatory approvals (including from competition authorities), which are expected to complete in 2023’s third quarter.