Cape Town-based internet service provider RSAWeb suffered a massive outage for most of the day on Wednesday, with the company confirming that the outage led to the complete or partial loss of connection for its clients across the country. The company said it was working on restoring services and that it would prioritise connectivity services. By around 19:00 on Wednesday evening, it noted reaching ‘partial service restoration’ in a post on Twitter. “As the process of restoration is delicate, priority has been given to connectivity services, following which we will systematically work to restore complex services such as Mobile APN and Cloud,” the company said in a memo to clients earlier in the day. On Wednesday morning it initially noted, via its social media platforms Facebook and Twitter, a service-impacting event on its cloud, which it said was affecting customers in Cape Town. Blackout But an hour later, customers across the country seemed to be affected by the network blackout, with the provider issuing new updates. “We are experiencing disruption to key RSAWeb services. Customers may experience intermittent to no connection to FTTx [fibre to the ‘x’, which uses optical fibre for last-mile connectivity], hosting, and VoIP services. Engineers are actively working on a resolution,” it said. Read: Microsoft probes Teams, Outlook outage as thousands of users report disruption [Jan 2022] It later noted that restoring the network would take longer than expected and that it could not give an estimated time regarding when the problem would be fixed. “RSAWEB experienced a major incident on our Cloud platform. Engineers have isolated the issue but due to the extent of the issue, the restoration process will take longer than expected,” it said. “RSAWEB engineers are actively working on restoring services post the major incident. Customers who experienced no connectivity may see some services restoring. We are aware certain services on FTTH [fibre to the home], Mobile & Cloud are still affected,” it noted in an earlier post. The outage also affected the Moneyweb website and app, along with Gauteng-based radio station Jacaranda, Maroela Media, The Citizen, 2OceansVibe, among others. We have been affected by the major RSAWeb outage. We apologize for the inconvenience. Be sure to tune in on your radio for More Music You Love! pic.twitter.com/AzN8ACV9vL — Jacaranda FM (@jacarandafm) February 1, 2023  RSAWeb is yet to give an incident report or statement as to what caused the outage. This is a developing story.