The rate of increase in new vehicle prices rose to 7% in the fourth quarter of 2022, from 2% in the corresponding quarter a year prior. TransUnion Africa Auto vice-president of auto information solutions Kriben Reddy said on Tuesday new vehicle price increases are below the inflation rate, but are expected to rise in the coming months. TransUnion’s vehicle price index (VPI) also revealed that the rate of increase in used vehicles moved up to 9.1% from 7% in the same period. Source: TransUnion Reddy said all indicators suggest a tough year ahead for South Africa’s automotive industry, despite the industry until now shrugging off ongoing vehicle price inflation, declining consumer credit health and looming macroeconomic storm clouds to record an increase in vehicle sales in the fourth quarter of 2022. Cheap rand Econometrix chief economist Azar Jammine believes the depreciation in the value of the rand has contributed a lot to the increase in new vehicle prices. Jammine said the rand has fallen to its weakest level since April 2020 on a real trade-weighted basis and is now as cheap as it was at the time of the Covid-19 pandemic – and virtually as cheap as it was at the time of ‘Nenegate’ and the global financial crisis in 2008/09.  The reference to ‘Nenegate’ is to 9 December 2015, when former president Jacob Zuma fired then finance minister Nhlanhla Nene, causing a collapse in the value of the rand. “The rand in terms of purchasing power is at the moment as cheap as it’s been on any of those occasions and so one has to pay more to import things than at any stage in recent years,” said Jammine. He noted that the rate of increase in new vehicle prices is still below the consumer price index (CPI) because motor manufacturers are still trying to suppress their increases – “but they cannot hold off indefinitely”. Read: Toyota dismisses suggestions of above-inflation price increases [Oct 2022] “Motor manufacturers did not raise new vehicle prices more than they have because of the risk that the market will collapse. “The market has been surprisingly strong but I don’t expect it to last that way.” Interest rates Absa Vehicle & Asset Finance head strategy and business analytics Henry Botha said each time the interest rate is increased, it gets tougher and tougher for consumers to be able to afford to buy a vehicle. But Botha said the vehicle market is still resilient in terms of sales despite the price increases caused by the rand/US dollar exchange rate and the price at which vehicles can be brought into the country. He said this is possibly due to vehicles landing in the country after all the stock shortages and being distributed to dealers at the new price. Used vehicle stock levels improving Botha expressed surprise that used vehicle price increases are still below 10%, as the latest data released by Statistics SA revealed that used vehicle prices had increased by about 15%. He said used vehicle stock levels are improving and pointed to the number of vehicles listed on cars.co.za increasing to almost 70 000, from the low 60 000 at the beginning of 2022. “That is an indication to me of how many financeable used vehicles are out there in the market,” he said. Financing deals TransUnion said the number of financial agreements in the passenger vehicle market increased by 1.5% year on year in the fourth quarter of 2022. Reddy said new vehicle finance deals surged by 13% while used vehicle deals decreased by 3.4%, as the market continued to recalibrate following the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic and global supply chain issues. However, Reddy warned that negative GDP growth from the prior quarter and low consumer confidence suggests the industry may face a slowdown in demand as the year wears on. “The first key indicator for the car market is consumer confidence. Deteriorating credit health is a leading indicator for a challenging trading environment for retailers and lenders.” He added that TransUnion’s Consumer Pulse Survey showed that “45% of consumers expected to decrease their retail shopping activities in the next three months, 58% expected to cut back on discretionary spending, and 46% expected to hold off on large purchases like appliances and cars”. “The other key indicator is GDP growth. Historically, we’ve seen that any growth rate below 1% is a likely indicator of a declining new vehicle market. A recent Bloomberg survey suggests that the economy is unlikely to grow by more than 0.3% quarter on quarter through 2023, with economists predicting GDP growth slowing to 1.2% this year from 2.3% in 2022. “At this level, the industry is treading a fine line,” said Reddy. Ratio of used to new TransUnion said the ratio of used to new vehicles sold shifted significantly in the past quarter, which it attributes largely to ongoing pressure on the supply of quality used vehicles. Reddy said a year ago, 2.31 used vehicles were sold for every new vehicle but this declined to 1.98 in the fourth quarter. He said 20% of used cars sold were less than two years old but this continues to decrease. “Demo models financed made up 4% of used financed deals, which indicates consumers are opting for older vehicles wherever possible, while car prices and pressure on disposable income increase,” he said. Reddy added that rising car prices are reflected in the average price points, with the percentage of new and used cars being financed under R200 000 dropping to 20% in the fourth quarter of 2022 from 27% in the corresponding quarter in 2021. “The limited number of quality vehicles available under R200 000 and rising prices also contributed to consumers migrating from the R200 000-R300 000 band to over R300 000, as consumers continue to look for value in the used vehicle market, with quality used vehicles increasingly difficult to source,” he said.