Finance minister Enoch Godongwana did not have any major surprises in his 2023 Budget speech which was delivered in Cape Town on Wednesday. As expected, he announced government’s initial Eskom debt relief plan (R254 billion) and increased tax incentives for rooftop solar PV in the face of SA’s worsening power crisis. For all our detailed and in depth Budget coverage click here. Godongwana mentioned in the 2022 mid-term budget in October that the Eskom debt relief bill would be tabled in February’s main budget, while President Cyril Ramaphosa announced in his recent State of the Nation Address that solar PV incentives or tax support is on the cards to help mitigate the impact of load shedding on households and the economy. Read:
Read/watch the 2023 Budget speech
Eskom to get a massive R254bn in debt relief
Tax relief to softening the blow of load shedding and inflation As is customary for the main budget, sin taxes or excise duty on alcohol and cigarettes were increased “in line with expected inflation” at 4.9%. Latest inflation data from StatsSA came in at just below 7%. Sin taxes  South Africans will be relieved to hear that fuel levies have not increased for a second consecutive year, with Godongwana announcing no changes to the general fuel levy and Road Accident Fund levy. To limit the impact of the energy crisis on food prices, he also announced that the diesel fuel levy refund will be extended to manufacturers of foodstuffs for a period of two years, from 1 April 2023 until 31 March 2025. There were no tax increases for individuals. Government did however claim to be “granting tax relief” in Budget 2023 by adjusting personal income tax brackets and rebates to account for the effect of inflation. Individuals will only pay income tax if they earn more than R95 750 annually. Social grants have increased slightly below inflation. The Covid-19 Social Relief of Distress grant has been extended until 31 March 2024. Read: Covid-19 social distress grants extended until March 2024 There, however, was no announcement on a permanent Basic Income Grant was made. Social grants The sugar industry will also be slightly relieved, with no hike in “sugar tax” this year. The minister said that the increase of the health promotion levy on beverages to 2.3 cents per gram of sugar is being delayed until 1 April 2025. Read:
‘Sin’ industries place more pressure on finance minister
Health-tax hikes threaten thousands of SA sugar jobs Government has, however, not budged on the industry’s calls for the tax to be scrapped altogether. In terms of government’s solar PV tax support, a tax rebate to individuals for solar PV panels of 25% of the cost for a limited period was announced. This is subject to certain conditions and will be capped at R15 000 per individual. SA’s fiscal position and GDP forecast Government’s fiscal position has improved, with the consolidated budget deficit expected to decline from 4.6% of GDP in 2021/22 to 4.2% 2022/23 and reach 3.2% of GDP in 2025/26. Meanwhile, government has raked in R93.7 billion more in tax revenue, when compared to National Treasury’s 2022 Budget estimate. National Treasury’s GDP forecast growth for 2023 is 0.9%, which is significantly more optimistic than that of the South African Reserve Bank’s latest forecast of 0.3%. Read: National Treasury’s GDP forecast is three times Sarb’s prediction Godongwana’s department expects SA’s 2024 GDP to come in at 1.5%, more than double that of the Reserve Bank’s estimate. Fiscal Framework GDP and CPI For all our detailed and in-depth Budget coverage click here.