 You can also listen to this podcast on iono.fm here. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: Many of us have employee benefits that we don’t pay too much attention to after we’ve signed our employment contracts. The fact that the contributions for these are deducted before we get our salaries makes it even easier to forget them. But as you prepare your finances for the new year, it’s important to have a look at these to see how they fit into your overall portfolio. Hi. I’m Boitumelo, and in this episode I’m joined by Elke Brink, who is a wealth advisor at PSG Wealth. She is going to give us a refresher on some of the benefits that you may have as part of your package, as well as tips on how to optimise these in 2023. Welcome, Elke. ELKE BRINK: Thank you. Good to be here. Thank you for your time. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: Elke, could you please give us a rundown of some of the benefits companies usually offer their employees? ELKE BRINK: Yes, of course. I think, as you mentioned, when we start a new occupation or in those first few weeks when you’re going through the whole process of completing millions of documents and making decisions, I think we’re all guilty [of not really concentrating] on what benefits we have, and we never revisit that. I think this is such a valuable component of most portfolios, and it’s important to understand what the company offers because it makes a big part of the rest of your financial planning and your portfolio. So normally, if a company offers quite comprehensive employee benefits, those would consist of three different components. The first one is medical aid, having some form of medical aid, either through the company directly or in your own capacity. That could also include gap cover. Together with that then there would be risk cover, consisting of different things. This is different for different employers, but mainly can consist of life cover, severe illness cover, disability cover, income protection, as well as funeral cover. These can become more or less comprehensive, depending on what the company offers. And then lastly there would be a retirement fund, which can be either a pension or a provident fund that you can contribute to. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: Elke, can employees change the default fund they are invested in if another portfolio better suits their investment strategy? ELKE BRINK: Definitely. I think when it comes to the investment portfolio side of the employee benefits, this is the most underutilised benefit in terms of the bigger scheme of things. I think a lot of individuals tend to forget that they actually have a retirement fund at work, should your company offer this, and you can really make it part of your investment strategy and your planning. So firstly what’s kind of great is that your contributions that go to your retirement fund are deducted before you earn your income. There’s an additional tax benefit also, as this basically decreases your taxable income. So it’s actually quite good [to be] saving a substantial amount in your retirement fund, and then knowing that you can choose the strategy. There would always be a default strategy chosen for the group. Normally with employers it works on what they call a ‘life stage principle’ and it just means that as a younger person you would automatically be invested more aggressively, and as you near retirement automatically your portfolio would switch more conservatively. This is not necessarily always the case, so it’s important to know what portfolio you are invested in and to change it if needed. As with any investment portfolio, it doesn’t necessarily always have to stay the same. So this does need to be reviewed as the world is changing, if you’re still in an appropriate fund for your holistic portfolio. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: When reviewing your personal risk benefits, is it important to factor in the company-provided ones as well? And what should you do if you find there are duplications? ELKE BRINK: This is quite important because I think, as we change occupations or change employers, we don’t always match this with what we have structured in our private capacity. So, as you mentioned, there can be duplications, or it can be that the benefits at work are completely sufficient and comprehensive, and maybe you can even look at cancelling something in your private capacity. So firstly, regarding risk benefits with an employer – there’s a great benefit to this: It’s much cheaper than structuring insurance in your personal capacity. And the reason for that is that the premium that is paid is basically calculated on the whole group of people. Especially if you’re a bit older, or maybe ill or anything like that, the average costing on the group will be done on everyone. So if there’s a younger group, for example, or younger people working in the company, it actually benefits you. So the costing is much less than in [one’s] private capacity. And then what’s important for you to take into account – and this is mainly to do with income protection – if you have a monthly income protector, there you need to be careful of not over-insuring as you will have the risk of insurers aggregating this and maybe not paying out at all. You are allowed to insure up to 100% of your net income. Normally an income protector is structured at 75% of income, but you can technically do 100% of income as it pays out tax-free. But it’s important to ensure that you don’t have two in place, maybe having one in place in your private capacity that’s maybe 75% of net income, and having one at the company – because then you have a risk of not getting a payout. So there I would just review that and review the detail of it as well. It might be, for example, that your one at work has a waiting period of three months, for example, but the one in your private capacity has a one-month waiting period. Maybe they can complement each other and you either need to cancel something in your own capacity if you are over-insured, or you just need to decrease it. So there you can definitely work with an advisor to just do the calculations of what you need. I would definitely amend the one in my private capacity. Also, [from] a cost-saving principle, you can rather use the premiums that you are paying towards the insurance towards your retirement. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: You just touched on cost as well. Is it worth doing a cost comparison for your risk benefits? ELKE BRINK: Definitely. As I mentioned, group benefits are much cheaper. And when it comes to especially the life cover on a group, most groups offer the opportunity for you to increase your life cover also on the group scheme. So there would for example be a default amount. You would have three or four times your annual income life cover, and you can flex it up to 10 times or 12 times annual cover. So do your cost comparison where you compare what life cover, for example, would cost as an individual, compared to if you were to increase your cover on the group and rather cancel the cover in your own capacity. I would definitely advise doing that or getting an advisor to help you with the cost comparison. But in most cases it would work out much better to rather do it on the fund. It’s a good exercise to do. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: With the end of the tax year coming up in February, how can you then optimise your annual tax benefit on your company retirement fund? ELKE BRINK: When you look at your retirement fund portfolio, this can consist of more than one thing. It can, for example, be your fund that you have at work and if you maybe in your private capacity have a retirement annuity structured. So you can look at the combination of everything to really benefit from your annual tax benefit, which is 27.5% of your taxable income up to a maximum of R350 000 a year that you can claim back from Sars [South African Revenue Service]. So let’s say you don’t have something in your own capacity and you only have your retirement fund at work – you are allowed to make additional voluntary contributions into your fund. So I would calculate what you are still allowed to do for this tax year in terms of getting a deduction – and perhaps consider adding another lump sum before the end of February, and at least getting that tax benefit as well. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: Some companies offer employees share incentives. How should you factor these into your overall investment portfolio? ELKE BRINK: That’s a very good question. I think this is quite important when it comes to having a share option [and] looking at how it fits into your diversification strategy in your portfolio. So firstly, mostly with an individual that has this option, you’re very exposed to one share. It is quite important in the bigger scheme of things, I think, to see how it fits into your portfolio. And it becomes even more important to diversify in the rest of your portfolio because, even if it’s a very well-performing share and it’s a great investment to have, you do need to take into account that you are very exposed to it if you have one share. So I would just advise ensuring you are well diversified holistically in the rest of your portfolio. And together with that it’s important to understand the tax implications with these share options. Because that’s not always explained very well when you leave the company, either [on] resignation or retirement, and you want to of course sell off these shares. You don’t necessarily have to sell them always, depending on what the scenario is. But at some point you’re going to want to sell the shares and it’s important to understand how that is taxed, because it’s not, for example, just as a capital gains tax reaction. It can actually be taxed on an income-tax level because it’s basically a benefit that the company paid you. So it’s quite important to just understand the tax implications around it as well. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: And how should one handle the medical aid risk benefits, retirement funds and share incentives when resigning or retiring from the company? ELKE BRINK: Of these different components that your company would have, the main important thing is that a lot of these things need to be taken into [your] private capacity when you leave, should it be resignation or retirement. The most important ones in terms of timeline would be your medical aid and your risk benefits, because you don’t want to be without cover. So it’s quite important to ensure that you do it correctly [and] immediately. With a medical aid you basically just sign a document that changes the bank details to your private bank details; but it’s quite important to really ensure you do it immediately so that there’s not a month that you’re not paying your premium towards your medical aid. And regarding how the risk benefit works – for example, your life cover and income protection and all of this – for 30 days from your last contractual day you will have cover, even if you have not signed an application form to take this over. It’s called a continuation benefit. It basically means you take it over in your private capacity. And quite a good benefit regarding this option is that in most cases – and that’s mainly the rule – there would be no medical underwriting required. So it’s not as if you’re taking out new insurance and you go through a full medical. If you do a continuation option, you just complete the application form but you don’t have to do a medical. There are of course exceptions when a medical is requested, but in principle, you don’t have to do one, which is really a great benefit if you, for example, have a bit of a health concern or, let’s say, you had an injury before and if you had to take out normal cover you would probably get a loading on your premium or an exclusion, when with this scenario you will not. So it’s a good way of getting clean cover, but basically just to stay within that 30 days that you have cover. Ensure you put it in place as quickly as possible, so that you are not without medical cover. Regarding the investment component, depending on whether you are retiring or resigning, of course, the reinvestment options will be different. If you’re retiring, for example, everything needs to be restructured in a way that you can now start earning an income from this. Resigning works a little differently in most cases [in] that we would ideally just reinvest these different investments in your private capacity so that you can just continue with the investment. But [in terms of] moving the share to just your private capacity, if it’s a share that you still want to keep in place you can. Depending on what it is, I would recommend doing an analysis at that stage, of the share, and decide if you want to sell it or not. And then together with that, of course, the retirement fund needs to be moved to your private capacity and [involves] making sure you are choosing an appropriate product that bears no tax implication. You do have the option, technically, when you resign to access your retirement fund, which is definitely not something I recommend. But just make sure you transfer it to an approved product that won’t have a tax implication – which would either be a preservation fund or a retirement annuity or possibly a new fund at a new employer. There it’s just important, let’s say for example you have a provident fund, that it needs to be similar at the new company. If it is, for example, a provident [fund] moving to a pension [fund] or the other way around, it’ll have a tax implication. So just know where to transfer the funds to make it as tax-friendly as possible, and align it with your strategy again in terms of how it fits into your investment portfolio. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: Elke, just one more question. When trying to make changes to these benefits that you have, would HR [human resources] be your first point of contact or would you have to contact the provider directly? ELKE BRINK: Normally HR or payroll would definitely be the first go-to person. With larger companies they sometimes have an individual that’s head of benefits. So depending on how large your company is, in many scenarios they would then refer you to the advisor, and the [group] advisor will be able to assist you with this. You can also speak to your personal financial advisor, who would have the knowledge of how to do this, and at least know who to contact. But in terms of, for example, making a change to the fund or a change if you for example want to add an additional contribution before the end of the tax year, the starting point would be HR. One important thing [that] wasn’t a question here, but I just want to add that a lot of people tend to forget to ensure with all these benefits that your beneficiaries are updated. So it’s very important in terms of firstly the retirement fund and, if you have life cover at work, to ensure firstly that you have beneficiaries nominated, and secondly, that [those are] updated. Legislation changed recently where if you don’t have someone nominated, the benefit will go to your estate, which is really not ideal. Normally what would have happened before this change is that the trustees would sit together and they would try to determine who your dependants are, if you haven’t nominated anyone. But that has changed now. So it’s quite important to ensure that you have an updated beneficiary. If you perhaps went through a divorce or anything like that, I don’t think you’d want to give your benefits to an ex-spouse. So make sure you update this often. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: Thank you so much for joining us on this episode, Elke. That was Elke Brink, who is a wealth advisor at PSG Wealth.