Sikonathi Mantshantsha will clock in for his last day as Eskom spokesperson on Tuesday (28 February), when his three-year fixed-term employment contract comes to an end. The state-owned power utility announced Mantshantsha’s separation from the entity in a statement on Monday. His exit follows that of Eskom CEO André de Ruyter less than a week ago when his final day at the helm of the utility was abruptly moved up by a month. Read: Eskom CEO André de Ruyter leaves with immediate effect Mantshantsha is a former journalist who once wrote critically of the power utility. According to the statement, he was appointed to lead the media desk during a difficult period in which the organisation needed to “restore trust and creditability” in its dealings with the public and stakeholders. Former journalist Sikonathi Mantshantsha joined Eskom ‘during a difficult period’ three years ago. Image: Supplied “Over the course of three years, Mantshantsha helped improve Eskom’s public image by driving honest and frank communication in the media domain on Eskom’s real position during a difficult period characterised by operating difficulties and increased load shedding,” the utility said. “This has seen Eskom become more accountable, agile, and transparent in its external positioning while increasing its share of voice with regular executive team briefings to the public on key developments.” In the words of Eskom interim Group CEO Calib Cassim: “Sikonathi has been the catalyst in Eskom improving transparency and frequency of information sharing, dealing with several difficult media engagements during his tenure. “Eskom is grateful for his contribution to our organisation, and we wish him well during his next journey.” Daphne Mokwena, current senior manager for the retail centre of excellence, will take over as leader of the media desk as acting group spokesperson with immediate effect while the utility begins the hunt for a permanent spokesperson. Mokwena has been with the utility for 21 years and has, among others, served as Gauteng customer services senior manager and Gauteng distribution spokesperson, dealing with “challenging issues such as Soweto debt” to Eskom. 