 You can also listen to this podcast on iono.fm here. SIMON BROWN: I’m chatting now with Jacques Plaut, a fund manager at Allan Gray. Jacques, I appreciate the time, as always. A note you put out last week really got me thinking. You call it ‘contrarian thinking’. In a sense it really is, I suppose, a way of asking the right question in the right way, which is so incredibly important as an investor. JACQUES PLAUT: Agreed. I think often for investors it’s very easy to react, and to see what’s in the newspaper, what the headlines are, and you react to that. Really, I think it’s an investor’s job to think a bit more deeply and to try and evaluate companies regardless of the newspaper headlines. SIMON BROWN: And oftentimes it’s – I hate the phrase – thinking ‘out of the box’. But, as you say, it’s thinking differently. For example, iron ore. We saw the Kumba update. But what you’re saying here is, hang on a second, let’s understand what’s actually happening in the Chinese property market, because that’s going to be the impact, really. JACQUES PLAUT: For sure. I must admit that’s not super out-of-the-box thinking. I think everyone knows it, but the Chinese property market is so important for South African investors. Kumba, Anglo American and BHP make most of their money from iron ore. China buys two-thirds of the world’s iron ore. And in our view we are underweight those stocks. There are a lot of empty buildings in China, so it’s something we’ve been nervous of for a while. It’s definitely something to have front of mind if you’re a South African investor. And if you’re an investor in the index, they have a big weight. SIMON BROWN: That’s true. I can’t remember the name of the Chinese property company that blew up…. JACQUES PLAUT: I think there are about 10 of them. SIMON BROWN: You’re right, there are now a bunch of them. JACQUES PLAUT: Evergrande was that one. SIMON BROWN: Yes, Evergrande was that first one, and it was in all headlines for maybe six weeks. Everyone talked about … and then it kind of went quiet. But of course it hasn’t gone quiet, it’s just that the news cycle has moved on. JACQUES PLAUT: Yes, exactly right, so this is a problem. I think you are right, the news cycle has moved on but the problem is still there. The one stat I saw recently, which really struck me, is the amount of new building started last year. If you measure it in square metres, it was down 40% on the previous year. People are debating: okay, the Chinese population’s down a little bit. Is GDP going to be 1% or 3% or 5% or 6%? But [new building being] down 40% – if you’re investing in iron ore that’s a big number. SIMON BROWN: That is a giant number. Bringing it more directly home, of course [there is] load shedding. The question on the Sona (State of the Nation) [was], and I imagine the budget next week, is going to be around ‘how much longer?’. The question you’re asking is how it’s going to impact the stocks we’re investing in. We have had some highlights already from, for example, Pick n Pay – and Shoprite most notably. It’s having an impact and we need to significantly dig into that and understand. Read:
Power woes push PnP to review capital allocation
Shoprite staring down a R1bn-plus annual diesel bill
A load-shedding-induced price war looms, and PnP stands to lose JACQUES PLAUT: For sure. Yes, it’s bad on so many fronts. It definitely reduces the value of a lot of South African companies, but it doesn’t automatically make every SA Inc a sell. You’ve got to do the work. This is the kind of thing where a contrarian investor is supposed to look for opportunities. You can’t just do a knee jerk and say, okay, ‘There’s load shedding, let me sell all my SA Inc stocks’. In some of them I think there’ll be enough margin of safety and it could be an opportunity to buy. The kind of questions we would ask would be: ‘How does this impact your competitive position versus the peers? How does it change your position on the global cost curve?’ That kind of thing. SIMON BROWN: Yes. And I think we saw starkly different updates and market responses to both Pick n Pay and Shoprite. This also brings us to diversification. We talk a lot on this show around diversification. No doubt you and your colleagues at Allan Gray spend a lot of time thinking about it. As we sort of move into a year like this, is it almost a sense of perhaps we need some more? Or is it a case of ‘markets are always going to be weird, wonderful and tricky’? JACQUES PLAUT: I would say it’s more the latter. You have always got to be careful. It’s always a good idea to have some diversification, but you’ve also got to make some bets. And if you’re trying to outperform the index for clients, there’s no use your portfolio looking just like the index. So we do try and set up the portfolio for lots of different outcomes. We are not smart enough to know what the world is going to look like in three years’ time. You can be good at working out intrinsic value, but you can always get sideswiped by something you don’t expect. So I think it’s a good idea. Maybe the gold companies would be a solid example. We own them in the portfolio. They aren’t super high-quality companies. There are scenarios in which they aren’t going to be good investments, but we also think there are scenarios in which they are going to be crucial for protecting your wealth. If there’s runaway inflation in the developed world, you really do want to own some gold stocks to protect yourself against that. SIMON BROWN: And the gold stocks as distinct from gold because, of course, there is that leverage effect. What also struck me in the note you put out is you’ve got a fair bit of JSE stocks, but a bunch of them are what we would call the SA Inc stocks. Again, if we look out of the window we see the load shedding, we see inflation and all the other horrible stories out there, yet there’s actually value and opportunity in some of these – probably because when we look out of the window it’s so scary. JACQUES PLAUT: For sure. With SA Inc stocks, obviously, when you’re evaluating a stock you’re taking a 10- or a 15- or a 20-year view and load shedding, I hope, [will have] gone in two years’ time. But that’s a small proportion of most companies’ intrinsic value. We own Woolworths, we own Nedbank, Remgro; they’re all in our top 10. They are not totally but largely SA Inc stocks, and in all those cases we think there’s enough margin of safety to justify owning them. SIMON BROWN: It’s that margin of safety. That perhaps is the key for us. We’ll leave it there. Jacques Plaut, fund manager at Alan Gray, I always appreciate the insights. Listen to the full MoneywebNOW podcast every weekday morning here.