South Africans will next week (on 22 February) find out exactly what the impact of crippling load shedding has been on the tax base, when Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana delivers his annual budget. Since the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS) in October, the energy crisis has deepened, with citizens having faced bouts of up to Stage 6 load shedding. Being without power for several hours several times a day has become the norm, and some South Africans have been investing massive amounts in alternative energy solutions to keep their lights on – and their sanity. ENSafrica tax specialists believe it’s time for government to consider offering tax deductions on the high capital costs of installing appropriate power systems for personal use, that can also supplement the unstable electricity grid. Businesses already qualify for accelerated capital allowances, but the last amendment to tax incentives for investments in renewable energy was done in 2016, when the Income Tax Act was amended to provide for an accelerated depreciation allowance of one year instead of three. During a recent PSG Think Big webinar, South African Revenue Service (Sars) Commissioner Edward Kieswetter was asked about relief for ordinary households – either in the form of a tax rebate or a value-added tax (Vat) zero-rating on investments in alternative energy solutions such as inverters, generators, or components of solar technology. Kieswetter said although National Treasury and the minister of finance are responsible for tax policy, he believes the allowance for business investments was introduced at a time when government was not “as consciously aware” of the extent to which the energy crisis would regress and what other instruments were needed to respond to it. Kieswetter says he has already engaged with Treasury officials to consider what additional provisions can be made to provide relief for people who are forced to make investments to become more independent from Eskom. ENSafrica says the incentive could be similar to the programme that supported the installation of solar geysers to reduce pressure on the grid, while creating capacity for more generation. Tax collections During the MTBPS Godongwana said revenue collections were expected to be almost R84 billion higher than the estimate announced in the February 2022 budget. Read:
Better-than-expected tax collections bring fiscal relief
Sars’s ‘compliance dividend’ boosts mid-term budget However, since then the economy has experienced low to no growth, record-high levels of unemployment, a steep rise in living costs and an accelerated pace of emigration. When questioned about the impact of this on tax collections, Kieswetter said the emigration issue is being overstated. He believes the number of people at the top end of the earnings bracket who have left the country is not more than 6 000. “We need to better understand what the actual – the quantifiable – impact of emigration really is. I think the soft impact is high. Every South African who leaves because they have lost confidence in the system is bad for us. But the overall fiscal impact is not what some media sensationalise it to be.” Read: Emigration threatens SA tax system, Standard Bank says Kieswetter believes the “compliance dividend”, when non-compliance and corruption is tackled, offers sufficient opportunities for tax collections. ENSafrica on the other hand believes emigration has already had an impact and therefore it does not expect any increase in the top marginal rate of 45% for individuals (earning more than R1.5 million per annum). “This source of revenue [personal income tax] is already negatively impacted by emigration and poor economic growth. Increased personal taxes at this end of the scale would only serve to further reduce the total tax take from individuals in this category.” Meanwhile, the Chartered Institute of Business Accountants (Ciba) has called on government to reduce the income tax rate for individuals. CEO Nicolaas van Wyk says it is not fair that a small number of taxpayers have to bear the brunt of the income tax burden. “South Africans are compliant taxpayers but need help from government,” says Van Wyk. “It’s time for government to fully appreciate the burden that high income tax is placing on this small tax base.” Ciba has started a petition and has gathered 25 000 signatories from people in favour of a lower income tax rate. Little inflationary relief The ENSafrica team believes high unemployment and pay cuts will also impact collections from individuals. However, inflationary relief, which should have been large this year, is going to be used to balance the budget and it is unlikely that the full impact of inflation on taxpayers will be mitigated. Although there is a global trend to temporarily decrease the Vat rate to tackle inflation, grow the economy and increase revenue, South Africa has always resisted this trend. ENSafrica warns that before considering an increase in the current 15% Vat rate to help pay for a permanent basic income grant and national health insurance, government should first add to the current zero-rated list of essential foodstuffs. “There are no meat products on the current list and there are already calls for the zero-rating of certain chicken cuts.” Some good news is that the team does expect an expansion in the ambit of home office deductions, given the increase in permanent remote working. Read:
Withholding tax would aggravate SA’s situation – Kieswetter
Outsmart the taxman
Navigating the risks of double taxation