You can also listen to this podcast on iono.fm here RYK VAN NIEKERK: Business Unity South Africa, or Busa, sent a letter to President Cyril Ramaphosa last month, asking him to appoint more efficient ministers in key portfolios. Busa expressed concern over the poor performance of several portfolios, including mining and energy, trade and industry, transport, public enterprises and security. The letter comes before a long-awaited cabinet reshuffle. On the line is Cas Coovadia, the chief executive of Busa. Cas, thank you so much for joining me. Why did you send this letter to the president? CAS COOVADIA: We felt that as business we have a critical stake in the way this country is governed, because the problems we have had in government in the last few years have had a significant impact on the economy, [and] a negative effect on the ability of businesses to do business, to grow, to form new business. An essential element of that poor governance has been, in our view, [a] not fit for purpose cabinet and a cabinet that has not been aligned behind the president. So, we felt that without telling the president who he should appoint – because that is not our ambit, that is his prerogative – … it is necessary for us to just put on the table what sort of capacity, what calibre of people should be in cabinet, so that we actually have decisive and appropriate leadership coming out of government. RYK VAN NIEKERK: You did not mention anyone by name in the letter, but it’s clear that you refer to Gwede Mantashe, the minister of minerals and energy; Fikile Mbalula, the minister of transport who has been redeployed to the ANC and will be replaced; Pravin Gordhan; also the portfolios of trade and industry, and security. Are those the portfolios you believe have the worst leadership at the moment? CAS COOVADIA: That’s not what we’re saying. We’re saying those portfolios are critically important to the growth of this economy. Again, it’s the president’s prerogative. If he feels that the current incumbents meet the sort of criteria we have put in our letter, then it’s his prerogative to keep them there. We are not commenting on any individual. What we are saying is that energy is probably the most critical sector at the moment, and not just the load-shedding issue – although the load shedding obviously has a significantly negative impact on business, particularly on small and medium business, and also on citizens. What we are saying is that, given the importance of energy, given that South Africa has pretty ambitious commitments of decarbonisation, given that our financial sector and many of our corporates operate globally and would have to work within the context of a global environment that says that we have to move away from fossil fuel-based energy to cleaner energy, given that, we need a minister who is absolutely clear, and clearly behind the president’s plan, not on anybody else’s plan. The president’s plan is absolutely clear on the direction we need to take. We need a minister who is 110% behind that plan and will work with others to implement that plan. We need a minister who is 110% behind the path we’ve taken – that we need to move away from fossil-based energy to cleaner energy. It’s a process. It’s not an immediate move. We need to move away over a period of time, ensuring that a just transition pathway is put into place and we minimise any negative impacts of that, but that we also leverage off the economic opportunities of cleaner energy. Similarly, with law and order, law and order is probably the other very big issue in this country, both for business and citizens. Again, we need a minister who has the confidence of the police force, who is able to deal with corruption in the police force, who is able to rebuild our intelligence services to have the confidence of communities that government is serious about dealing with law and order issues, and a minister who can get on top of organised crime, because that’s what we’re seeing currently. So what we are saying [is that] we are reading the current environment, we are saying what the current environment is, and we are then saying what capacity we need in a minister to deal with the current environment. And that’s what our letter is [about]. RYK VAN NIEKERK: In the letter you also refer extensively to the mineral resources and energy portfolios, which have been consolidated within one ministry under Gwede Mantashe. And you suggest that that portfolio be split in two again. Why do you think that is of such critical importance? CAS COOVADIA: Yes, because both energy and minerals are critical to this economy at the moment. The bottom line is that in minerals we have failed in a number of areas. We haven’t had mining exploration in this country of any meaningful nature for the last decade or more. We’ve got significant blockages in mining licences and exploration licences. The sort of Mining Charter is still sort of there or thereabouts, and keeps on coming up all the time. And we actually could have done much better in the commodity boom a couple of years ago than we did, although all the mining brought in, did export and brought foreign exchange into the country, and that reflected in the tax figures. We could have done much, much better than that. So we believe that both mining and energy are [too] critical at this point in time for one ministry to deal with [their] critical issues. With the complications and complexities in both those issues, [having one ministry] might actually delay action further. While at the same time suggesting that we need a fit-for-purpose cabinet, we need to look at how we can trim cabinet down. We believe these two areas are of critical importance to the economy, critical importance to creating jobs, critical importance to citizens when it comes to load shedding and so on. And, given where we are now, given where we are in both those areas, because of the fact that we did not govern either of those areas appropriately, we believe that we need a focus on both of those areas by separate ministers. RYK VAN NIEKERK: You also cite the Department of Trade and Industry under Ebrahim Patel. That is not a ministry that’s always mentioned as one where there needs to be change. Why did you refer to that portfolio? CAS COOVADIA: Again, let me just emphasise we are not saying that the current ministers need to be changed. We are saying that these are the capacities that are needed. This is what the department should be doing, and it’s up to the president to decide whether, for instance, the incumbent can do what we are suggesting the department and the ministry should be doing. So let me be quite clear about that. I want to be absolutely clear – it is not the prerogative of business to suggest to the president whom he should appoint in his cabinet. Let me be absolutely clear about that. On trade and industry, what we are saying is that the department [and] the minister, have done very well on competition issues, on issues related to transformation in business, and so on. But there often seems to be a sort of relationship between business and the ministries that is not always positive, and the trade and industry department has got to work very closely with business, has got to listen to what business is saying about developing the economy, about promoting trade. Now with the African Free Trade Agreement kicking up pretty soon, with the Agoa (African Growth and Opportunity Act) negotiations coming up pretty soon, business’s voice has got to be at the forefront of those. And we believe that the trade and industry minister needs to work with business in that way, has got to see business as a critical partner. Unequivocally so. There should be no buts behind it. Business is a critical partner, because business is involved in trade-related issues every day. Business is involved in trying to develop the economy and doing business issues related to ease of doing business, red tape and so on, all of those fall in the trade and industry ministry. And our minister of trade and industry’s focus should be on making it easy for businesses to operate, making it easy for new businesses to open, and making it easy for businesses to actually employ people and so on. So that’s what we are saying, and we would want to see that sort of a relationship between the ministry and business. RYK VAN NIEKERK: Have you received a response from the president? CAS COOVADIA: No, we haven’t. And that’s fine. We weren’t asking him for a response. The letter is simply to put to the president what some of our thinking is, and he can obviously respond to that as he sees it. RYK VAN NIEKERK: Thank you, Cas. That was Cas Coovadia, the CEO of Busa.