Insurance giant Discovery has seen a double-digit jump in interim operating profits, helped in part by higher-than-expected new business and low policy lapses in its core health division as well as its life business returning to a profit after feeling the pinch of the Covid-19 pandemic. Despite strong growth, the company has said it won’t be paying out a dividend to shareholders. Delivering its six-month results to end December 2022, Discovery said normalised operating profits increased 20% to R5.9 billion, while normalised headline earnings soared 30% to R3.7 billion. Earnings per share however, took a hit, dropping 10% to 443.1 cents from a previous 498.8 cents. During the period Discovery’s core South African operations grew operating profits by 23% to R4.4 billion, with core new business annualised premium income (API) rising 15% to R11 billion. Despite facing macro-economic challenges across all its locations, including South Africa, and after feeling the impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic, the Discovery Life unit saw profit increasing 30% to R2.5 billion. New business increased by 17% to R1.4 billion, which was lifted by an increase in contributions. Discovery Health saw operating profit growing by a mere 4% to R1.8 billion as new business API of the schemes under administration increased by 23% to R4.4 billion. Read:
Top-end Discovery medical aid plans to increase by 10%
Discovery launches affordable health insurance
How Discovery’s once-off ‘Wellth Fund’ works “Discovery Health Medical Scheme (DHMS) delivered a strong performance over the period, driven by higher-than-expected new business, with lapses continuing to remain below pre-Covid-19 levels,” the company said. The division experienced some constraints arising from high once-off costs, spent on the acceleration of technology and infrastructure projects. “The strategic focus on leveraging technology to drive efficiencies and improve service levels has increased digital engagement, with 70% of all customer engagements completed through digital channels, up from 68% in the prior period,” Discovery said. Despite strong profits, Discover decided to again suspend dividends, saying it will revisit this at the end of the financial year. “Discovery is still of the view that given these developments and the current rates of growth, the ordinary dividend should not be reinstated for the current period,” it said. The group took on a conservative approach to managing its capital in 2020, at the height of the Covid pandemic, and has withheld dividends since. During the current reporting period, it has also increased spending on new projects, mainly Discovery Bank. Spending on projects was over 20% of operating profits, the company said. “Discovery Bank [IS] operating within plan and [is] rapidly approaching profitability and scale. In addition, the strong performance and consequent cash generation has now removed the need to pursue the stated capital placement previously announced to fund the PAH capital contribution already made,” Discovery said. The group also cited its R1.5 billion contribution to Ping An Health, the China-based insurance company in which it holds a stake. During early afternoon trade, shares in the company were up 3.3% to trade at R147.02.