 You can also listen to this podcast on iono.fm here. SIMON BROWN: I’m chatting now with Craig Ivy, investment analyst at Futuregrowth, on their listed credit market, the quarterly update for the end of 2022. Craig, I appreciate the early morning, as always. The key thing that struck me, and which you put right at the top in the report, is that we are still a little below in terms of total issuances, below the pre-pandemic numbers. Is this in your sense due to a lack of appetite or perhaps – and certainly we’ve seen it in a lot of listed companies – the balance sheets are just [the] strongest. Perhaps maybe the need is a little bit reduced. CRAIG IVY: Good morning, Simon. It’s good to be back. Yes, I think it’s a little bit of both. I think what we are seeing is that obviously some of the counters were a lot stronger during Covid, especially the Reit sector. They are slowly coming back. Corporate seems to be slowly coming back into the market. The effects of Covid, I think, have put the SOEs [state-owned enterprises] off a little bit, so they haven’t really come back to the market, but we are expecting that there should be a little more issuance on the corporate side coming through in 2023, as well as some of your more well-known SOEs, I suppose the better-performing SOEs, coming back to the market this year. So I think the demand is there from the institutional side, the investor side. I think it’s corporate slowly coming back. SIMON BROWN: Okay. A bunch of questions come from that. Banks, major issuers pretty much par for the course. You mentioned Reits. Hyprop and Equites [Property Fund] both came to market for the Reit sector – and successfully. Certainly there was appetite. [Those are] only two, but there was appetite for it. CRAIG IVY: It. Yes. For the Reit sector during the quarter there were only two, but for the year I think there were quite a few Reits that came through. So, looking at Fortress and Growthpoint, Hyprop and Equites – the Reits were pretty active even though [not] I think at the 2019 levels. But we are starting to see a little more demand for them as well, or [see] them coming back into the market. SIMON BROWN: You mentioned state-owned enterprises, and you also mentioned the better-quality SOEs. I know Transnet just did an issue, but of course that’s this year, so it doesn’t fall into this report. But, for example, Airports Company [SA] had a two times over-subscription on their debt. When we think SOEs, we always think doom and gloom. It’s not necessarily always the case, and certainly capital markets are prepared to loan. CRAIG IVY: Yes, exactly. I think it’s … and it comes down to name specific. It’s extremely name specific. I think it’s been recently reported that [for] some of the SOEs, the implicit support that is being given to some of them. But there are better-performing ones. I mean, the DBSA [Development Bank of SA] also coming back last year – we’re expecting them to come through, or they just came through in January as well. They should have a good year in 2023. We are expecting the IDC [Industrial Development Corporation] to come through in 2023 as well. Airports Company South Africa, Acsa, is actually doing a pretty well-supported auction as well. I think they tapped a longer-term note in December as well. So there is appetite for some of these SOEs in the market. SIMON BROWN: I was reading some of your earlier reports, sort of late 2021 – I think fourth quarter, 2021 – and you made the point that it was [very] sort of skewed to the short end. Are we still seeing a lot of shorter duration coming through? CRAIG IVY: To some extent. But I also think based on the stronger balance sheets on the corporate side, we are seeing a lot of demand for your longer-term instruments coming through. If I can give an example, some of the counters have much stronger balance sheets and are pricing a lot higher than where they were in 2019, or not that high any more. But still, you’re looking at a company that is good quality, [with a] stronger balance sheet than what it was in 2019, at pricing at slightly higher levels than what they were. So you can see that that would automatically attract a lot of investors. We are also seeing from the higher-rated side the banks coming in and taking up a lot of that paper for their ……4:11 liquidity purposes. So I think that shift is maybe moving slightly more, depending on the credit again, to the higher end of the longer tenure side. SIMON BROWN: I get your point. We’ve been talking here mostly about the primary market, which is the issuances and the like. The secondary market – is it very robust, is it picking up traction in terms of the secondary market? CRAIG IVY: Simon, the liquidity in our market is not amazing but we do see trades coming through. It’s largely your higher-rated counters coming through again, and then obviously banks coming through. We do often see a lot of bank capital instruments trading, and I think that is off the back of the extreme demand that we saw for the additional tier-one paper last year. So a lot of capital bank instruments, trades, seniors, a lot of DBSA trades as well. Just again, it goes to show a higher-rated counter. But it’s mostly trading that you see in your high-quality assets out there. SIMON BROWN: Almost a buy-and-hold type of market. There’s nothing wrong with that. And particularly if I’m the buyer, and I’ve got a nice yield and I’m happy with the credit rating, I buy the paper, I get my coupon and then I get my capital back at the end of term. CRAIG IVY: Exactly that. And also I think there are a couple of counters where there’s a lot of paper in issue, but there are some that only issue around R1 billion a year. And if you think about three or four or five bidders that are bidding for that and getting allocated that, there’s not a lot of trading room to manoeuvre. So it really is more or less a buy-and-hold scenario. But it is improving. I think there’s a little more appetite to trade into the market for price discovery and, as the years go on, it’s just getting a little bit better each and every year. SIMON BROWN: Yes, I take your point on that. A last question – and it really jumped out at me – I was scrolling down and there’s the one graph which [shows] almost no activity, and then it picked up in ’21 and significantly in ’22. That is [on] the green social and sustainable linked issuances – particularly green. Truthfully that’s really good to see. I mean that market was big in ’21, really big in ’22, but it is well ahead of the pre-pandemic. CRAIG IVY: Yes. I think with our current electricity issues we could most likely see more green bonds, more sustainability bonds coming through this year. I do expect it to continue. I do think it was largely the banks and also the Reits coming through. So I wouldn’t be surprised to see a little more issuance of that to the middle of this year. SIMON BROWN: Craig Ivy, investment analyst at Futuregrowth, talking the listed credit market for the quarter ending 2022. Craig, appreciate the early morning insight. Listen to the full MoneywebNOW podcast every weekday morning here.