Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana has earned praise for delivering a budget that shows sensitivity to the plight of South Africans faced with mounting food and transport costs. The concerns are the size of government debt and how National Treasury will service the interest in the coming years, given what looks like a dwindling pool of taxpayers. We asked Rene van Zyl, joint head of Tax and Fiduciary at Investec, to offer some insights on the budget as it impacts individual taxpayers. In 2021 it was reported that SA had 5.2 million individual taxpayers who accounted for 40% of all tax revenue, and that this tax base was dwindling. Do we have any more recent figures on the tax base and what impact this is having on the fiscus? I am not sure if we will ever know the true impact [of the dwindling tax base] given the fact that I don’t think the number of taxpayers released by government has ever been accurate for various reasons. What I do know is that we are seeing significant improvement in tax collections and that the South African Revenue Service [Sars] is getting its house in order Do we have any idea of the number of taxpayers that have emigrated in recent years? Exact figures are hard to come by, but what we do know is that people may emigrate but they still have family and business interests in SA, so they are not always cutting ties completely. I think the government should worry about the impact of young people with skills leaving the country, even though they don’t necessarily contribute to the tax base significantly when they are young. They still contribute to the country and the people living in it. That is a greater concern for me. In his budget speech, the finance minister said: “Our country is reaping the benefits of a more efficient and effective tax administration, that is building trust to increase voluntary compliance and boost revenue collections.” Do you agree with this reasoning? Are we seeing significant improvement in Sars under Commissioner Edward Kieswetter’s leadership? Yes, I most definitely agree with this statement. Like I said, Sars is getting its house in order and this fiscal year will collect R93 billion more than expected, which is a great result. This is also a friendly reminder to individuals and businesses to remains compliant from a tax perspective. Drilling down into the budget, what are the new tax brackets for personal income taxpayers and will this offer significant relief to consumers? Personal income tax brackets will be adjusted for inflation, which will increase the tax-free threshold from R91 250 to R95 750. South Africa is still recovering from Covid, and on top of this we have to live with power cuts and high inflation. It is obvious that low-income households are battling. The standard of living for the average South African is declining, so we have to ask ourselves whether the R4 500 adjustment to the tax-free threshold is sufficient. I am not negating government’s efforts in providing relief, but from a practical aspect we need to ask if this enough. A person earning an income of R1 million annually will see their effective rate going from 29.8% to 29.2%. Will this help? It’s questionable. Consumers are struggling. Were there any significant announcements pertaining to retirement tax and transfer duties? Transfer duty exemptions were lifted. Properties under R1.1 million can be transferred free from transfer duty. On the retirement front: The retirement death and severance benefit tables are adjusted which means your once-off tax-free withdrawals increased to R550 000 from R500 000. Sin taxes – was the increase to be expected? Yes, no surprise there. Sin tax is an easy target and easy to collect. Much easier to collect than donations tax as an example. We collect more from sin tax than estate duty and donations tax combined. The corporate income tax rate has been reduced to 27%, but we still have one of the highest rates in the world. Is it a case of too little too late? This is an interesting one. In my opinion, technically that is not 100% accurate, we don’t have one of the highest rates globally. Most countries reduced their corporate rates to incentivise foreign investment. But now, post-Covid, some first world countries are increasing their corporates rates again. The UK corporate rates were increased to 25% from 19% effective 1 April 2023. Godongwana announced that tax revenue collections for 2022/23 are expected to total R1.69 trillion. This massively exceeds the 2022 budget estimate by R93.7 billion, and the 2022 medium-term budget estimate by R10.3 billion. What are the reasons for such a big jump in tax revenue? Tax compliance in my view contributed to this number significantly. A high-net-worth unit was created within Sars and this probably helped with transparency. Treasury also announced a generous tax incentive scheme for renewable energy installations for individuals and businesses – but critics say the 25% personal income tax rebate on solar panels for households and the 125% reduction on the cost of renewables for business is not enough to convince citizens and businesses to go green. What’s your opinion? The capital outlay for solar is expensive. I don’t think government has done enough for individuals. The 25% that is capped at R15 000 may not help at all. For middle income earners this may still be a difficult pill to swallow. Under the expanded incentives, businesses will be able to claim a 125% in the first year for all renewable energy projects with no thresholds on generation capacity. It’s important to note that the adjusted incentive will only be available for investments brought into use for the first time between 1 March 2023 and 28 February 2025. Was there anything else you were hoping to see in Wednesday’s budget that didn’t materialise? There was no increase in tax-free saving limits, which is disappointing. Also, no exchange control updates or further relaxations and nothing to attract international investment, which we were expecting. Brought to you by Investec. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.