Moneyweb Twitter Spaces – a series of live audio conversations on various topics related to investments, personal finance, property, cryptocurrency and more. On Wednesday, Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana presents his 2023 Budget. This budget will be critical, as it will show which of government’s promises and plans will be implemented and how much it intends on spending. The most daunting and pressing issue is load shedding, along with the South African Revenue Service’s (Sars’) assessment on whether its collections have exceeded its forecast. Much attention will also be placed on government’s intended support for the unemployed and SMEs, post-pandemic. Click here to join the Twitter Space. To make better sense of the Budget, Moneyweb is hosting a post-Budget Twitter Space conversation on Thursday, February 23, on how the National Treasury’s budget affects South Africa as a whole as well as your individual finances. Join Moneyweb editors Ryk van Niekerk & Suren Naidoo, Journalists Akhona Matshoba & Amanda Visser, the global head of tax at Old Mutual Nazrien Kader and the chief economist at KH Equity Partners Ndumiso Hadebe this Thursday from 13:00 to 14:00. The discussion will include highlights from the Budget, its tax implications, as well as how the new fiscal plan may affect your household finances, South Africa’s economy and the small business sector. This Twitter Space is free to attend and listen in to, and can be joined via the Moneyweb Twitter page, or by clicking here.  Bios  Nazrien Kader
Global group head of tax at Old Mutual Kader, a chartered accountant, joined the Old Mutual Group in September 2019 as global head of tax. She also serves as non-executive director on the boards of certain subsidiaries in the Old Mutual Group. She is the former partner of Deloitte (over 16 years) and the former managing partner for the Deloitte Africa Tax & Legal business (representing 15 Anglophone countries) – an office she held for almost a decade. Kader served on the Deloitte Africa Executive Committee and Deloitte EMEA tax & legal executive committee, where she was responsible for the strategic direction, operational and financial execution and overall leadership of the Deloitte Africa tax & legal executive. She has over 25 years of experience in the area of business tax, advising clients across the spectrum of income tax, primarily in the financial services industry.   Ndumiso Hadebe
Chief economist at KH Equity Partners Hadebe is an award-winning economist. He has extensive experience in the areas of strategy development, corporate governance, investment deal structuring and trade promotion, facilitation, and aftercare. He serves on the board of The Da Vinci  Business School and is the chairperson of the finance, audit, infrastructure and risk (fair) sub-committee. Hadebe also serves as an advisor to the Gauteng Provincial Government Cabinet. He is the author of the book entitled ‘Reflections on SA’, the foreword of which is written by the Presidency. Hadebe has been awarded the Sedibeng District Mayor’s award for Leadership and the Gauteng Premier’s award for an outstanding contribution in the province. His body of work extends through Asia, the United States and the African continent. He advises blue chip multinational organisations such as Mastercard, American International Group, Mazars, Sasol and International Finance Corporation on strategy, macro trends and investment allocations among other things. His recent assignments have included the promotion and facilitation of investment initiatives at the 4th SA Investment Conference, the Malawi Confederation of Chambers of Commerce and Industry and Sustainable Infrastructure Development Symposium South Africa. Hadebe holds an MBA from GIBS, including a Post Graduate Diploma in General Management at GIBS, a BCom Honours in Economics from Unisa, a BCom in Economics and International Trade from NWU and has also completed the alternative investments programme from Harvard Business School. Click here to join the Twitter Space.