JSE-listed steel producer ArcelorMittal has reported a significant decrease in earnings for the full year ended December 2022, as the company battled various input challenges related to the energy crisis, inefficient rail operations as well as tougher global market conditions. The group released its full-year financial results on Thursday via Sens. Sub-Saharan Africa’s largest steel producer reported a 62% drop in headline earnings to R2.60 billion from R6.86 billion in the previous year, led by a 50% drop in earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisations (Ebitda) to R4.27 billion when compared to the previous year. Headline earnings per share (Heps) followed a similar trajectory, slumping 62% to 234 cents, down from 615 cents in 2021. The group further reported a 13% fall in sales volumes to 2.2 million tonnes, led by a 14% drop in domestic sales to 1.9 million tonnes and a fall in exports of 14 000 tonnes. “The trading environment for steel has been significantly impacted by recent economic headwinds, both globally and locally,” CEO Kobus Verster said in a statement. “However, our business has responded effectively as a consequence of our evolving value plan, together with the support of our committed employees, customers, and suppliers. Despite the sharp weakness which characterised the second half of last year, our financial results are significantly stronger than they would otherwise have been.” ArcelorMittal has again refrained from declaring a dividend, having last done so in 2011 when the company made changes to its dividend policy. The share was down over 2% in midday trade in Johannesburg on Thursday. Addressing challenges Eskom’s energy crisis and poor rail operations at Transnet are just some of the issues that the company highlighted as contributors to its performance this period. Read all our Eskom coverage here. In relation to Eskom’s implementation of load shedding to manage its electricity generation shortfall, ArcelorMittal says the risk of power cuts causing damage to its equipment remains high and to manage this risk it is investing in alternative energy solutions. According to the group, it is close to concluding a feasibility study into a 200MW renewable energy solution, which it plans to begin construction on in the fourth quarter of 2023. The project is expected to yield significant cost reductions for the group by the 2024/25 financial period. Costs associated with optimising energy consumption totalled R126 million in 2022. “The decision has been made to construct one large 200MW plant at Vanderbijlpark as this will yield the greatest operational and commercial benefit. Work is progressing on closing power purchase agreements with third party renewable energy providers,” the group said. Rail disruptions at Transnet have also had an impact on the group’s operations, costing it significantly in sales losses reported this period. According to the company, rail disruptions which have been a constant feature this financial period have led to “plant closures and affected sales deliveries”. Read: SA’s retail and fast-food giants demand tax relief from government The group says it is working closely with Transnet Freight Rail (TFR) and Transnet Port Terminals (TPT) to realise the rail and ports authority’s plans to allow third party access to Transnet rail networks. “The company has completed the prefeasibility study with its specialist rail operator advisor into the commercial viability of third-party rail access. It has been agreed to progress to the definitive feasibility study stage, which includes funding solutions.” “The October 2022 launch of the rebranded ArcelorMittal Rail and Structures (AMRAS) business was well received, and with its 48kg and 57kg per metre mainline rail products, it should contribute meaningfully to the localisation aspirations expressed in the country’s rail policy,” the group said. Outlook According to ArcelorMittal, recovery for the industry is looking positive. The sector is looking to record a recovery in demand for steel this year as well as positive movements in international pricing. Locally, the trading environment is forecast to recover in the first half of 2023, coming in better than what was reported in the last six months of 2022. “ArcelorMittal South Africa will continue to react swiftly and decisively to the difficult market conditions. We will increase volumes through targeting import replacements and Africa overland volumes, following an assertive cash management process, and adopting a flexible approach to operating plants in reaction to the available order book, while adjusting fixed cost levels accordingly,” Verster said. “The business is positioned to navigate the immediate and near-term challenging market conditions while remaining focused on our longer-term objectives, namely, to leverage off the long-term investment case for steel, as well as the vital role it will play in the re-industrialisation of the South African economy and the transition to a low carbon, circular economy,” he added. Listen: Simon Brown speaks to independent analyst Jimmy Moyaha about the commodity prices cycle and the movement of steel prices.  You can also listen to this podcast on iono.fm here.