Investors, no doubt used to a weak rand and high oil price giving Sasol a big boost, seem to have expected better results than the 9% increase in core headline earnings the energy and chemical group reported for the six months to December 2022. The share price dropped by more than 5% as soon as analysts and investors had time to read through the results and tune in to listen to a presentation by Sasol executives. The figures were probably out of sync with analysts’ models and investors’ gut feel, which were focused on the weaker rand and high oil price. The exchange rate over the six months to 31 December was 15% better for Sasol, with the rand averaging R17.33 per dollar compared to R15.03 in the first six months of the previous financial year. The average oil price was 24% higher at nearly $95 per barrel (just below $77 in the first half of financial 2022). This resulted in the average rand oil price increasing by 43% compared to the first six months of 2022, and is reason enough for excusing investors for expecting more than the 9% increase in earnings. Refining margins and average chemical prices also increased. However, the segmental results show that every part of Sasol performed worse than in the comparative period. Challenges CEO Fleetwood Grobler and CFO Hanré Rossouw noted that Sasol had to deal with “several challenges” during the period, including safety and operational stoppages at its coal mining operations, ongoing power supply problems, weaker global economic growth, continued disruption of supply chains, and higher feedstock and energy costs. “We delivered a mixed financial result for the first six months of the 2023 financial year, supported by higher oil prices, benefits from our continued cost and capital discipline, and a weaker rand,” says Grobler. “However, this was offset by lower productivity in our mining division and low coal quality, which forced us to purchase more coal from external sources. “Production volumes across most of our business segments were lower compared to the prior period, mainly due to a planned shutdown of a part of the Secunda Synfuels plant in September 2022, as well as lower production in the international chemical businesses due to lower demand.” Sasol discloses in the results that higher oil prices and a recovery in demand led to an increase of 28% in gross margins, but that this was offset by higher input costs, such as the purchase of coal from third parties. Secunda Synfuels was shut down for major maintenance work, needed every four years. The chemicals division reported a decrease of 12% in margins due to higher energy costs and the higher prices of feedstock. In addition, sales volumes declined by 5% as a result of lower economic activity worldwide. “Our international operations were impacted mainly by challenging market conditions, but we continue to work closely with our customers to mitigate these impacts,” says Grobler. The South African businesses were severely impacted by the ongoing load shedding. Grobler points out that electricity disruptions don’t only affect Sasol’s operations, they also affect its suppliers and customers. “Despite facing a challenging external environment, we remain committed to stabilising and improving the performance of our business by focusing on the areas within our control. “We have made good progress in stabilising our operations in recent weeks, but a key priority remains the improvement of productivity and coal quality in our mining operations,” says Grobler, giving the normal list of production figures the group aims to achieve this year. Sasol’s money man says the group performed well during the period, considering the difficult operating environment. “In terms of returns, the SA businesses are doing well, but the US chemical interests had a bad six months due to low demand for chemicals,” says Rossouw. “We are seeing a bit of improvement in demand and a recovery in profitability.” He reiterates the view that Sasol is focusing on factors within its control and aims to control costs, even if it would “love a robust pricing environment”. He says Sasol’s debt – which was a huge problem a few years ago – is under control, allowing Sasol to declare an interim dividend of R7 per share. This is equal to 36% of earnings, with Sasol aiming to increase the payout to 40% once debt decreases from the current $5 billion to below $4 billion. Management says it is on target to deliver on its promises in terms of its balanced strategy of People, Planet and Profits. Meanwhile, analysts were neither very happy nor unhappy with the results. Shaun Murison, senior market analyst at IG, says: “The growth in core earnings and cash flow were a little bit disappointing in the context of high energy prices prevalent over the reporting period.” He says management’s comment regarding the outlook for coal production also creates the impression that Sasol will need to continue to source more coal from third parties, which will have an impact on costs and earnings going forward. Asief Mohamed, director and chief investment officer at Aeon Investment Management, says the results did not meet the expectations created by the high oil price and weak rand. “Costs were higher than expected and the impact of production problems at the mining division was bigger than anticipated. “However, Sasol is not the only company impacted by rising costs,” he adds, referring to higher energy prices in SA and everywhere else.  View or download a pdf of the above here. Brought to you by Sasol. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.