Despite weak economic growth, high inflation, and crippling levels of load shedding revenue performance and projections surpassed the 2022 Budget estimates. Revenue collections for the current tax year are expected to be almost R94 billion higher than expected in February last year and R10.3 billion higher than the October adjusted revenue figures. For all our detailed and in depth Budget coverage click here. Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana announced no new tax rate increases in his Budget speech but warned that new spending policies, such as a possible extension of the social wage bill or the introduction of a basic income grant to replace the Covid social distress relief grant “may prompt a reconsideration”. Tax collections The South African Revenue Service (Sars) is expected to collect R1.69 trillion in gross tax revenue for the current tax year. The higher-than-expected revenue will be used to strengthen the social wage bill, increase infrastructure investment, narrow the budget deficit, and address fiscal and economic risks. The major fiscal risks include: Compliance efforts Between 5% and 10% of the higher-than-expected tax revenue can be contributed to the compliance drive, efforts to broaden the tax base and confrontation of illicit activities. Godongwana promised additional funding to the tax authority to strengthen tax administration and compliance efforts. Edward Kieswetter, Sars Commissioner, said during a recent PSG Think Big webinar, that the compliance dividend has played a major role in increased revenue collections. He believes there is still sufficient “low hanging fruit” available to the fiscus. Sars has collected more than R1.2 billion in revenue and handed over 92 cases for criminal proceedings with the National Prosecuting Authority. Two of the cases have resulted in successful convictions relating to tobacco smuggling syndicates. Inflation-related relief Hard-hit taxpayers will get inflation-linked adjustments to the personal income tax brackets, as well as the retirement tax tables and inflation-related increases in sin tax.  Government is adjusting the individual income tax brackets to compensate for inflation to the tune of R15.7 billion. On retirement, the tax-free amount that can be withdrawn will increase to R550 000 from the current R500 000. The brackets of the transfer duty table will also be increased by 10%, allowing properties below R1.1 million to avoid any transfer duty payments. Medical tax credits will increase from R347 to R364 per month for the first two members, and from R234 to R246 per month for additional members. Excise duties on alcohol and tobacco are increased by 4.9%. This means that a can of beer will increase by 10 cents, a bottle of wine will go up by 18 cents and a bottle of whiskey will now cost you R3.90 more. A packet of cigarettes will be 98 cents more. The big ticket taxes Revenue from personal income tax is expected to be 8.6% higher (R602 billion) than what was budgeted for, corporate income tax is estimated at R345 billion or 7.6% higher than estimated in February last year and export tax is a whopping 101% higher at R819 billion. Revenue from Value Added Tax (Vat) has been adjusted down to R426 billion from the expected R440 billion in February last year, mainly due to the larger-than-expected Vat refunds on zero-rated manufactured exports. National Treasury says government’s medium-term fiscal strategy remains focused on narrowing the budget deficit and stabilising debt. “The fiscal strategy also avoids tax rate increases that would overburden households and firms during a slow and uneven economic recovery and makes targeted injections to spending.” Big spenders Treasury says the future of the Covid-19 social relief of distress grant, which is currently funded until 31 March 2024, remains under discussion. It adds that any permanent increase in expenditure, such as a new social grant, will need to be matched by permanent revenue increases or spending reductions elsewhere. “Tax increases are often put forward as the natural response to cover expected revenue shortfalls, but in a highly unpredictable or low-growth economic environment, such increases carry significant risks.” Government again remarked on the negative impact of tax increases on economic activity. The impact is even more pronounced when growth is weak. “For this reason, government intends to avoid tax increases while the economy is recovering from recent shocks.” Godongwana said that in the face of rising uncertainty government is required to do bold things. “To put the fear of failure aside and execute the difficult tradeoffs needed to get from where we are now, to where we want to be in the future.”