Trading updates from the country’s two biggest supermarket groups, Shoprite and Pick n Pay, show just how stark the difference is in sales growth between their brands serving middle-market and upper-income customers. The periods aren’t entirely comparable – Shoprite’s is for 26 weeks to January 1, while Pick n Pay’s is for 17 weeks to December 25 – but both instances include the peak retail trading period of November and December. Read:
Shoprite reports strong HY sales on record Black Friday, festive season
Power woes push PnP to review capital allocation Across the second half of the calendar year, sales at Checkers were up an astonishing 16.9%. By contrast, in the 17 weeks between September and Christmas, Pick n Pay’s sales were up just 3.2%. In the former’s case, this is an incredible acceleration from the 6.8% in the previous six months, while in Pick n Pay’s case, this is a slowdown from the 5.4% in its first half. Factor price inflation into things, and PnP’s sales actually contracted in real terms for the 17 weeks. Checkers showed real sales growth of around 7.5% for the 26 weeks. The market punished Pick n Pay with shares closing 8% lower following its update on Wednesday, not far off a 52-week low. The internal price inflation figures tracked by each group (9.4% for Checkers/Shoprite/Usave and 10% for Pick n Pay/Boxer) are below CPI for food (±12%) but will be higher in the Shoprite/U-Save and Boxer instances. This is because of the higher contribution from commodity categories (maize meal, flour, samp, cooking oil, bread) in these stores. It is hardly a stretch to imagine that inflation in these stores is as much as two percentage points higher, while in the Checkers and Pick n Pay brands, it would easily be at least one percentage point lower. * In all cases, liquor sales are included.
** Internal price inflation disclosed for SA operations in each group’s case. Adjusting for inflation, sales at Checkers grew by more than the sales at Pick n Pay fell in the latter stages of last year. While July and August are absent from Pick n Pay’s numbers (its first half ended on August 28), it highlights that “October trade was particularly soft (sales +3.3%) and was followed by improved November momentum thanks to a solid Black Friday promotional campaign, and further improvement over December (+7.2%) as customers responded to the group’s seasonal product offering”. It also notes that the “accelerated rollout” of its new-look Pick n Pay and QualiSave stores has been disruptive to sales. It has converted 93 stores to the new Pick n Pay QualiSave banner and is on track to reach 130 full upgrades (across both brands) by February. The group says “sales growth from stores fully converted is significantly higher than in non-converted stores, and averages an encouraging 10.5%”. This is more than three times higher than the 3.2% for the whole of the Pick n Pay unit, which suggests that sales growth in the remaining 200-odd corporate supermarkets is close to flat (or negative). Of greater concern is that sales from these new-look supermarkets were up 15% in the first half of the year (to end August). But this was a far smaller base (41 stores). In September, CEO Pieter Boone admitted that scaling the rollout of new stores, where there wasn’t constant management attention on the new outlets, would be a challenge. Based on the numbers, this is likely starting to be a factor. The Checkers growth engine is premised on its core estate (with some stores in need of a revamp, but these have limited competition), its Fresh X supermarkets (with all the frills, such as in-store Starbucks, etc) and the new smaller Checkers Foods convenience stores. The last of these remains modest in scale but allows the group to trade in markets and neighbourhoods where it doesn’t currently have a presence (and where it doesn’t need to find acres of space to build a supermarket). This will move the dial going forward. All of this is underpinned by its market-leading Sixty60 on-demand service which continues to drive overall sales growth. Deceleration Pick n Pay’s online sales are up 70% in the year so far (from March), with growth in its on-demand offer (PnP asap! as well as groceries on Mr D) up more than 100%. Again, what’s worrying is the deceleration in growth from the first six months of the financial year (to end August) – online turnover growth was 82% in H1, with sales on asap! up by more than 200%. The offer on Mr D, under a commercial services agreement between PnP and Mr D parent Takealot, is being aggressively pushed by both parties with incentives like free delivery on orders and other discounts. Beyond the battle for the middle- and upper-income customer, the two groups are almost neck-and-neck when it comes to the less affluent market. Market share race At Shoprite and Usave, sales are up 15% while Boxer sales are up 13%. Substantially all of the growth in the 17 weeks was from new stores (like-for-like sales were up 0.2%). The group says “the deceleration in like-for-like sales growth in the latter part of the 43-week period was driven by a strong base associated with the impact of the July 2021 civil unrest on Boxer’s promotional campaign timing in the base year”. It says this has normalised and “Boxer SA sales have accelerated post period-end, with like-for-like sales for the month of January at 9.7%”. Crucially, “Boxer has gained market share in 10 of the first 11 trading months of FY23”. Shoprite sales growth in the first half (15.1%) are more than double the rate achieved in the second half (7.1%). There will be some base effects in that first half because of the unrest in the previous year. It, too, continues to gain market share. By sales, Boxer remains less than half the size of Shoprite, but it is one of only two growth engines for Pick n Pay (the other is its clothing business). Soon, it will be half of the group’s SA sales. There will be no slowdown of the rollout of new Boxer stores. Categorically, the group cannot afford to pull back. This fight for less affluent customers is just getting started.