As farmers closed out 2022 and welcomed in 2023, there was an eerie sense that they had seen this all before. A year ago, the government declared a national state of disaster in response to torrential rains that afflicted several parts of the country. These were the heaviest rainfalls on record for many parts of South Africa. As we entered the first weeks of 2023, heavy rains again swamped large parts of the country, making this the fourth year in which rainfall far exceeded the average. This and other climatic issues such as veld fires have dominated the headlines over the past years. All these issues have impacted food production, manufacturing and distribution, driving home the message that climate variability is a new reality for all stakeholders in the agricultural industry. It’s as yet unknown what impact the recent excessive rainfall will have on profitability, but we know from past years that floods have delayed plantings and harvests, increased soil moisture above acceptable levels, and affected the grade or quality of certain crops. Such climate variability has become the new normal for agricultural producers around the globe. Marlene Louw of Absa Agribusiness notes that the agricultural industry is not only affected by climate variability but also has a key role to play in mitigating climate change. She notes that numerous opportunities are emerging for agricultural producers within the broader climate advocacy agenda. Examples include differentiated pricing and services from financiers and insurers, for producers engaging in sustainable/green production practices. These challenges and opportunities however need to be navigated within a context of extremely elevated costs. Cost pressures building up Official production cost numbers for December, as released by Stats SA in the Producer Price Index, show that agricultural production cost increased by 15.7% year on year. Within this context, Louw notes “2022 was a good year for grains and oil seed prices, but what is not apparent to the broader public are the cost pressures building up within the system, from fertilisers to seed, packaging, shipping, and fuel costs. “These have put agricultural margins under pressure. Since South Africa is an importer of various agricultural inputs such as chemicals, fertiliser and machinery, exchange rate movements have amplified the effect of higher global inflationary pressures.” The exchange rate The additional cost implications of load shedding on agriculture and food production have been well documented in the media over the past weeks. What is touched on less is the effect of load shedding on the exchange rates. The rand-US dollar exchange rate has a strong correlation to what is happening with energy. In July 2022, Absa’s SA Strategy Research noted that the rand weakens by about 5c a day under Stage 6 load shedding or about 0.8c per stage per day. Louw notes that exchange rate depreciation is a double-edged sword. “On the one hand, it increases rand-based prices of export commodities and products, but it also affects most input costs as a large share of agricultural inputs is imported.” Input cost surges are further amplified by needing to invest and run backup systems during load shedding. According to Louw, while this is creating extreme pressure on margins it also provides new opportunities over the medium term. “As companies and individuals invest in renewables, this opens up new possibilities, for example selling surplus power to the grid. Louw notes that the rand will continue to be a key factor affecting profitability within the agricultural sector in 2023. “Since March 2022, the rand weakened 27% against the US dollar, measured peak to trough. This shows the importance of exchange rate protection such as forward cover or options – as offered by Absa. Sentiments deteriorating but there’s room for optimism The Agbiz/IDC Agribusiness Confidence Index (ACI) fell by four points in the fourth quarter of 2022 to 49. This is the first reading below the neutral 50-point mark since the second quarter of 2020 and implies that agribusinesses are slightly downbeat about business conditions in South Africa. “Persistent episodes of load shedding, higher input costs, rising protection in some export markets, animal disease outbreaks, rising interest rates, intensified geopolitical tensions which disrupted supply chains, and ongoing weaknesses in municipal service delivery and network industries remained the key factors survey respondents cited as their primary concern,” says Agbiz. Louw highlights that despite the headwinds mentioned above, there are also reasons to look to the rest of 2023 with optimism. “As China emerges from its harsh lockdown on Covid, farmers could see some improvements in export prices for export crops such as nuts. Agricultural commodity prices could also benefit from robust growth in China.” Leveraging long-term relationships Challenges during 2021 and 2022 have shown the benefit of long-term relationships. As an example, fertiliser availability was a key risk in 2022, largely because of disruptions caused by the war in Ukraine. “Russia and its supporters like Belarus are key players in the global fertiliser market,” states a report by Absa Agribusiness. “After the invasion of Ukraine and the subsequent sanctions and logistical disruptions, there were extreme concerns about local fertiliser availability during 2022. Our market intelligence has shown that amidst this uncertainty, input firms managed sales by limiting panic buying and by ensuring supplies to long-term customers, based on their long-term purchasing patterns.” Louw says that Absa Agribusiness also adopts this long-term philosophy in its business. “We realise that agriculture is cyclical and success in this industry is underpinned by partnerships that are built and nurtured through time.” Brought to you by Absa Agribusiness. Moneyweb does not endorse any product or service being advertised in sponsored articles on our platform.