Can one use tracker funds or an exchange-traded fund (ETF) as part of, or a complete 100%, of a living annuity portfolio? For example, the S&P 500, the MSCI World Index, or the Nasdaq 100. How do I go about that exactly? Am I forced to work with a defined, structured living annuity product from specific service providers such as 10X or Sygnia? Or can I go to any service provider of my choice and tailor-make a specific living annuity with them?  Dear reader, Thank you for your question. As living annuities do not fall under the Pension Funds Act and are not restricted by the provisions of Regulation 28 thereof, there are no restrictions on how you can allocate the funds within your living annuity. That said, only registered and duly licensed financial services providers (FSPs) may offer living annuities, so be sure to check the FSP number. The breadth and range of investment fund choices will depend on which funds the financial services provider has made available on their investment platform. There are a number of such platforms and service providers available in the market so it is advisable to do your research to establish the various fund choices offered by these service providers. With regard to your question pertaining to index funds, keep in mind that … You will not be able to allocate directly to a tracker or ETF fund because a living annuity remains domiciled and administered in rands in South Africa. Instead, you would need to find a feeder fund solution which meets the desired index and/or tracker solutions for selection and allocation within your living annuity. Once you have made your choice of service provider and platform, the individual fund allocation and proportions are completely at your discretion since there are no restrictions on asset class or global and/or local weighting of such allocations. It is useful to keep in mind that living annuities are completely transferrable, which means that if at any stage in the future, you find a more appropriate solution or a platform that offers a preferred range of funds, you can transfer your living annuity with ease. The only requirement is that your living annuity investment remains domiciled in South Africa and the income distribution(s) are paid to a South African bank account in your name. 