Randall Williams has resigned as executive mayor of Tshwane, a municipality that includes the capital, Pretoria. While his official statement said his resignation is effective at midnight on Monday, he subsequently stated that after consultation with various political parties in the city, and to ensure continuity, his resignation would take effect from midnight on 28 February. He said he has requested that MMC for finance and leader of executive business, Peter Sutton, assume the role of acting executive mayor. Williams faced calls by the opposition Economic Freedom Fighters for his resignation after an Auditor-General’s report flagged more than R10 billion of irregular expenditure in the city, according to an Eyewitness News report. On 2 February the City of Tshwane published the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2022 on Sens, despite the financial statements having had an adverse opinion from Auditor-General (AG) Tsakani Maluleke, indicating that they were not a true reflection of the city’s financial affairs. Further, chair of the independent audit and performance committee Robert Cameron-Ellis had also advised during a council meeting days earlier, that the statements would be more useful for stakeholders if accompanied by the correct information. Read:
City of Tshwane no longer a going concern – AG
Multiparty coalition to meet Tshwane leaders about adverse audit opinion
Myth busted: ‘No one person can be blamed for Tshwane’s adverse audit opinion’ In a statement released on Monday, Williams said a core goal as executive mayor had been to ensure the stability of the multi-party coalition in Tshwane. “I do not want the political instability that has taken place in Johannesburg and Ekurhuleni to spill over into Tshwane. To keep the multi-party coalition together required continuous communication and engagement to ensure unity in our city to achieve our goals. I resign today because I believe it is in the best interest for continued stability of the coalition in the city.” He added that when he was first elected mayor at the end of October 2020, the city was in an “incredibly challenging position.” Read: Tshwane budget may be legally disputed (Aug 2020) “We had just removed the ANC administrators who had mismanaged the city and our country was still in a state of Covid-19 lockdown. Having inherited a R4 billion deficit at the time, my immediate goal was to stabilize the city’s finances. At that point I was leading a DA minority government and within a year we would have the local government elections. Thus there was immense pressure to guide the city to those elections and ensure stability in the government which was incredibly difficult.” “In November 2021 I was once again elected as the Executive Mayor of Tshwane, this time at the head of the city’s first multi-party coalition government. Our focus as a team has always been on prioritising core service delivery in the city and ensuring its continued financial stability. This is why we kicked off 2022 with our aggressive TshwaneYaTima campaign to highlight the challenges facing the city in terms of non-payment and driving collections so that we could enhance service delivery. In the months that followed I conducted numerous basic service delivery operations across the city to ensure that our teams were on the ground. I have joined and led our by-law teams as we restored law and order in our city and have been particularly proud of TMPD who have removed illegal drugs worth millions of rands off the streets and arrested countless drug dealers. “Our focus on core infrastructure in the city has never waivered. We have never opted for vanity projects that bring no direct benefit to our residents. Top of our priorities have always been our electricity, water and road infrastructure which after years of neglect required urgent attention. We prioritized substation refurbishment projects across the city from Bronkhorspruit, to Kosmodal to Soshanguve to ensure we protect this critical infrastructure. Furthermore, at the end of this month we will formally unveil Townlands, the biggest social housing project in the country. “I implore the next leadership of the city to stay true to these priorities as we look towards the future,” he added. South Africa’s main opposition Democratic Alliance, of which Williams is a member, stated that it may deploy him in a new role. Read:
No mercy from Eskom for cash-strapped City of Tshwane (Jul 2022)
Large number of Tshwane staff have not been paid their salaries (Sep 2022)