The value of capital expenditure projects announced by state-owned enterprises (SOEs) slumped by a massive 85.3% in 2022. This, together with the significant 40.8% decline in the value of projects announced by general government, bodes ill for any improvement in South Africa’s already-poor economic growth rate. The 2022 Nedbank Capital Expenditure Project Listing report released on Tuesday said the value of projects announced in 2022 is however higher than pre-Covid levels. The report revealed that: The value of new projects announced during the year fell by 36.7% to R248.5 billion in 2022, from R392.7 billion in 2021. The private sector remained the major driver, with planned new projects increasing by 49.6% from R129.4 billion in 2021 to R193.6 billion in 2022, accounting for 78% of the total value of new projects announced that year. The value of projects announced by public corporations or SOEs declined by 85.3% to only R34.9 billion (from R236.9 billion) following the announcement of large projects by Eskom, the SA National Roads Agency (Sanral) and Transnet in 2021. Government also announced fewer new projects in 2022 after presenting its Strategic Integrated Projects two years ago, with the value of general government projects slumping by 40.8% to R20 billion in 2022, from R33.8 billion in 2021. Econometrix chief economist Dr Azar Jammine said the 36.7% decline in the value of new projects announced in 2022 “is dramatic”. However, he was not surprised that the private sector accounted for such a high percentage of the value of the total projects announced, as it is continually the dominant element of overall fixed investment. He said the slump in capital expenditure by SOEs “is dramatic but not surprising given the state of SOEs”. “State-owned enterprises don’t have any money to spend on projects,” he said. Jammine said the implications of the findings in the report are that South Africa’s economy will struggle this year. “We are looking at 0.4% growth and the Reserve Bank is looking at 0.3% growth. These figures are way below what we had anticipated previously,” he said. Read: SA faces R4.8trn infrastructure investment gap by 2030 (Aug 2022) Poor confidence The report said there was a moderation in fixed investment activity in 2022 as strong local and domestic headwinds unsettled and eroded business confidence. It said already depressed business confidence was worsened by intense load shedding, as Eskom struggled to sustain power supply, as well as a deterioration in global growth prospects. “The impact of the Russian war on Ukraine continued to manifest through higher commodity prices and a surge in inflation, which forced central banks to aggressively tighten monetary policies. “At the same time, demand from China, one of our key export destinations, was contained by its zero-Covid-19 policy for most of the year. “These undermined activity in some of the export-orientated industries. On the other hand, high global commodity prices, amplified by the Russian/Ukraine conflict, encouraged some mining companies to expand operations,” it said. Nedbank’s research showed that the recovery in fixed investment is struggling to gain momentum on the back of a challenging environment, which is causing apprehension by some organisations, particularly in the private sector, to invest in large-scale capital projects. The report said companies in some industries also have sufficient capacity and therefore have little need to expand operations until demand improves substantially. The report highlighted the negative impact of the factions within government and the ruling ANC, stating: “The divisions within government on how to stabilise the electricity supply in the face of destructive vested interest and widespread criminality are unlikely to inspire confidence and could still convince many private companies to either postpone or scrap their expansion plans. “Within this murky context, we forecast growth in GFCF (gross fixed capital formation) to slow to around 1.3% in 2023, down from an estimated 4.5% in 2022,” it said. The report said there is likely to be some acceleration in fixed investment activity in the renewable energy sector. And, although capital outlays by the public sector will remain patchy, the listings suggest some improvement in infrastructure investment as government slowly presses ahead with its strategic projects. Most of the biggest projects were announced in the first half of 2022, with the investment boost coming from: The Green Hydrogen Plant at the Coega Special Economic Zone (SEZ), worth R75 billion; The fifth and sixth rounds of the Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Procurement Programme (Reippp), valued at R34.3 billion and R12.1 billion respectively; and The Seriti coal mine windfarm project worth R12 billion. However, the report highlighted that total project announcements excluding these mega projects amounted to about R60 billion, suggesting hesitancy among businesses to commit to large capital expenditure given weak business confidence. The largest general government project announced is the 524 000m2 mixed-use government district worth R8 billion, in Salvokop in Pretoria. Sector focus The report said most of the medium-sized government projects were dominated by waste and water treatment projects in various provinces. It reported a big jump in investment in the mining and quarrying industry, with R33.3 billion in new projects announced, the largest of which is the green energy wind project worth R12 billion by Seriti Green. The number and value of projects in the transport, storage and communications industries were ramped up from R8.8 billion in the first half of the year to R20.1 billion in the second half, to total R28.9 billion for the year. This included the Transnet National Ports Authority’s plans to spend R16.1 billion on infrastructure development and on the acquisition and replacement of assets at the ports of Mossel Bay, Saldanha and Cape Town. The report said investments into the finance, real estate and business services industries remained relatively subdued, reflecting the slump in the commercial property market caused by pandemic-induced changes in working practices, which have reduced demand for office space. It listed a total of R15 billion worth of new projects, including: Investec’s plan to spend R6 billion to redevelop the old Corobrik site in Durban into a logistics and distribution hub; and The R5.5 billion Nkuna Smart City by the Masingita Group of Companies, which involves the construction of a new shopping centre in Elim in Nkuzana. The wholesale, retail and motor trade, hotels and catering industries also remained subdued. However, Shoprite plans to invest R3.5 billion into renewable energy sources and Pick ‘n Pay R2 billion in a new distribution centre in Gauteng. Read: Shoprite staring down a R1bn-plus annual diesel bill The report said no new capital investment plans were announced by the manufacturing industry in the second half of 2022, adding that “investments into the sector remain at a historic low of R6.7 billion”. “Developments within the industry are undermined by the electricity shortage and fading competitiveness. The biggest new project captured is the construction of the South32 aluminium plant in Richards Bay, worth R3 billion,” it said. Rowan Goeller, an analyst at Chronux Research, said there is a dislocation in the public sector between project announcements and anything actually happening because these projects are all in government’s long-term grand infrastructure plans that are announced. Goeller said the private sector projects are definitely interesting, with big investment going into renewable energy, the mining and agricultural sectors seemingly still investing and some industrial deals. “It paints a picture of at least continued investment. The private sector work should be hitting the market at some stage in the short term because generally it’s a reliable indicator. “For the construction world, I think they probably don’t place great emphasis on announcements of public projects anymore. I think they have long got over getting excited over any form of public sector announcement on projects.”