The Eskom board has, in light of the imminent unbundling of Eskom, decided not to fill the position of chief operating officer currently held by Jan Oberholzer. This was disclosed by board member Mteto Nyati on Thursday during a media briefing providing an update about the challenges the power system is facing. Oberholzer has been in charge of Eskom’s operations since July 2018 and will retire at the end of April when he turns 65. Read: Eskom’s shocking diesel rip-off On 31 January the struggling power utility had to intensify load shedding from Stage 4 to stages 5 and 6, but announced at the briefing that it would be able to reduce the level towards the weekend. This however came with the warning that the system remains vulnerable and unreliable, and its performance is unpredictable. Stage 6 load shedding leaves consumers in the dark for up to 10 hours a day as the load is reduced by about 6 000 megawatts (MW). South Africa had to contend with a record amount of load shedding in 2022, and so far in 2023 has been suffering the rolling blackouts every day – mostly at Stage 4 or higher. The search for a replacement for Eskom CEO André de Ruyter is underway, with the board expecting a list of possible candidates from its recruiting company in the next two weeks, from which a shortlist will be compiled, Nyati said. De Ruyter, who has been leading Eskom for the past three years but was unable to improve the performance of its power stations, resigned in December, citing the loss of the political support needed to do his job. Read:
De Ruyter disappointed at lack of support at Eskom
De Ruyter’s ‘removal through inaction’ is similar to Zuma killing the Scorpions
The hunt is on yet again for a CEO to fill SA’s toughest job Nyati said the Eskom board is keeping a close eye on the implementation of Eskom’s plan to significantly reduce load shedding in the next two years, while keeping an open mind about suggestions as to how the execution can be accelerated. Key to this is increasing the availability of Eskom’s generation fleet, especially the completion of the refuelling and steam generator replacement of Koeberg Unit 1 and returning Kusile units 1, 2 and 3 to service. The unavailability of the Koeberg unit represents about one stage of load shedding and the Kusile units more than two stages. Nyati said the Koeberg project, which will pave the way to extending the nuclear power plant’s operating licence for a further 20 years, is proceeding smoothly. Eskom hopes to restore operations at the Kusile units, where a slurry build-up led to the collapse of Unit 1’s flue-gas duct in October 2022, within a year. The ducts of units 1, 2 and 3 shared a chimney, and due to doubts about the integrity of the chimney Eskom had to shut down the other two units as well. Read:
SA’s power lifeline frays as Eskom scrambles for diesel
Just find the wretched money for the diesel!
South Africa urgently seeks cash for Eskom to buy diesel Acting head of generation Thomas Conradie said Eskom has submitted a request to the Department of Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment for exemption from emission requirements to allow it to temporarily bypass the flue-gas desulfurisation (FGD) system on the three generation units. This will pave the way for the construction of temporary stacks to get the units online within a year. According to Nyati the board is doing what it can to speed up government processes in this regard. Conradie said Kusile Unit 4, the only unit currently in operation at the power station, is still being run in conjunction with the original equipment manufacturer. Both parties are closely monitoring the slurry being carried over from the FGD system to the stack, and they will take load losses or switch off the unit to do further inspections if necessary. “There is risk, but it is carefully managed,” he said. According to Conradie, Eskom is currently running its Gourikwa and Ankerlig open-cycle gas turbines (OCGTs) at a load factor of 16% and has the funding to secure enough diesel to feed them until the end of the utility’s financial year on 31 March. The funding thereafter has not yet been secured and the revenue allowed by energy regulator Nersa is based on a load factor of only 6%. Eskom will issue a request for proposals later this year for the supply of liquefied natural gas (LNG) to the OCGTs, which will be more economical than using diesel. De Ruyter previously said the plants have already been modified to run on either diesel or gas. Performance Conradie admitted that Eskom does not always get the desired improved performance from its maintenance programme. Management and the board are jointly looking at what should be done to improve on that, he said. He said it is important that the scope of the outage must be correctly determined and that preparation is crucial. At the moment there are still issues around the availability of funds for outages after August this year, but funds for long-lead spares for 2023 and 2024, some of which must be ordered a year or two in advance, have been allocated. Read: Eskom unbundling expected to be completed by December 2022