For all our detailed and in-depth Budget coverage click here. Government is making some wide-ranging concessions to lessen the blow of persistent power outages, high inflation and high food and fuel prices. Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana announced relief of around R13 billion for tax incentives to encourage investment in solar energy, in his 2023 Budget. There will also be no increase in the general fuel levy or the Road Accident Fund. He also announced future relief for food producers who are buckling under increased input costs in diesel expenses because of the impact of load shedding on their operations. Read/watch the 2023 Budget speech Rooftop solar incentive Government is proposing a rooftop solar incentive for individuals to invest in photovoltaic projects that will generate power. Government has allocated R4 billion for this incentive. Individuals will be able to receive a tax rebate to the value of 25% of the cost of any new and unused solar panels. “To qualify, the solar panels must be purchased and installed at a private residence, and a certificate of compliance for the installation must be issued from 1 March 2023 to 29 February 2024.” The rebate can be used to offset the individual’s personal income tax liability for the 2023-‘24 tax year up to a maximum of R15,000 per individual. This relief will only be available for one year. For example, an individual who purchases 10 solar panels at a cost of R40, 000 can reduce their personal income tax liability for the tax year starting on 1 March by R10,000. Carmen Westermeyer, partner at Maitland & Associates and presenter of The Tax Faculty’s Tax Café webinar, this week referred to the fact that post-Covid many people have continued working from home and has been struggling because of consistent higher stages of load shedding. She said a private individual who installs a solar system in order to continue his trade may qualify under Section 12B. Although it may not be possible to deduct the full cost, she would think that an apportionment in accordance with the floor space used for trading purposes could be considered. Fuel levies Government has also foregone another R4 billion to the fiscus by not increasing the general fuel levy.  South Africa’s fuel prices are driven by international crude oil prices, supply-demand balances and the rand-dollar exchange rate. Fuel prices have been on the up for the last year with inland unleaded petrol remaining above R20 per litre for most of 2022. As a result, no increase is made to the fuel levy as well as the Road Accident Fund (RAF). The R4 billion in the 2023 budget is on top of the R10.5 billion that was foregone because of a temporary relief period of four months in 2022. The diesel levy refund that was introduced more than 20 years ago to provide full or partial relief for the fuel and RAF levies to the farming, forestry, fishing and mining sectors is going to be extended to the manufacturers of food products. This relief is mainly to combat rising food inflation and the impact it has on already squeezed consumers. The refund will apply to diesel used in the manufacturing process (to run generators) to produce food. This will take effect from 1 April 2023, with refund payments taking place once the system is developed. It will be in place for two years until 31 March 2025. Expansion of relief provisions Government has announced a temporary expansion of its existing tax incentive (Sect 12B in the Income Tax Act) for businesses to encourage increased investments in renewable energy. He has allocated R5 billion in his 2023 budget to allow for deductions on the costs of qualifying investments. The write-offs will range from a one year write off to three years to create a “cash flow benefit” during the early years of the investments. Section 12B currently allows for a 100% write-off in the first year of expenditure for photovoltaic projects below 1 megawatts (MW). Businesses can deduct 50% of the costs in the first year, 30% in the second and 20% in the third for qualifying investments in wind, concentrated solar, hydropower below 30 MW, and biomass and photovoltaic projects above 1 MW. With the expanded incentives companies will now be able to claim a 125% deduction in the first year for all renewable energy projects with no thresholds on generation capacity. The adjusted incentive will only be available for investments brought into use for the first time between 1 March 2023 and 28 February 2025. In his Budget Review Godongwana gives an example where a company with as positive taxable income will see their tax liabilities reduced because of the larger cost deductions. For example, a renewable energy investment of R1 million would qualify for a deduction of R1.25 million. Using the current corporate tax rate, this deduction could reduce the corporate income tax liability of a company by R337,500 in the first year of operation.