Eskom has announced that its CEO André de Ruyter is leaving the state-owned power utility with immediate effect – over a month early. In a statement released late on Wednesday, it said: “Following the convening of a special board meeting on 22 February 2023, the Eskom board and Group Chief Executive (GCE) Andrè de Ruyter have reached mutual agreement to curtail his notice period to 28 February 2023. “The board further resolved that De Ruyter will not be required to serve the balance of his notice period but that he will be released from his position with immediate effect.” De Ruyter resigned from the struggling parastatal in December, after three years at the helm. His last day was set to be 31 March 2023, according to board chair Mpho Makwana’s statement at the time. He resigned shortly after Mineral Resources and Energy Minister Gwede Mantashe said the power utility was attempting to overthrow the government by failing to end load shedding. Read:
André de Ruyter resigns as Eskom CEO
De Ruyter’s ‘removal through inaction’ is similar to Zuma killing the Scorpions
De Ruyter says he survived murder attempt in December De Ruyter seems to have become more outspoken in his criticism of government of late. In an interview with eTV’s Anika Larsen this week, De Ruyter decried entrenched corruption in government, saying: “I expressed my concern to a senior government minister about attempts – in my view – to water down governance around the $8.5 billion US dollars that, by and large through Eskom intervention, we got at COP26. The response was essentially, ‘you know, you have to be pragmatic – in order to pursue the greater good, you have to enable some people to eat a little bit’. So yes, I think it [corruption] is entrenched.” He also criticised the Department of Public Enterprises having direct control of Eskom, the criminality laying siege to the power utility, and the “vociferous opposition to the Just Energy Transition”. In his State of the Nation address earlier the month, President Cyril Ramaphosa said the energy department is to now oversee Eskom. On Wednesday Eskom said acting GCE arrangements are being finalised with the shareholder minister and will be communicated shortly. The utility has seen 13 CEOs in a decade. Read:
Eskom’s survival depends on debt relief and tariffs, CEO says
The hunt is on yet again for a CEO to fill SA’s toughest job