South Africa’s biggest business group urged President Cyril Ramaphosa to use an upcoming cabinet reshuffle to improve the performance of a government that’s been slow to deliver on promises of economic reform. In the letter seen by Bloomberg News, Business Unity South Africa slammed the performance of Ramaphosa’s administration in areas ranging from energy policy to safety and security. Business Leadership South Africa, another major group, also signed the letter. Read: Deputy President Mabuza resigns Dated 24 January, the letter was first reported this weekend by News24, a South African news website. Ramaphosa, who came to power in 2018 promising swift economic reform and a crackdown on corruption, has come under stinging criticism from business, opposition parties and the ruling party’s labor union allies for its failure to quickly enact policies to ignite growth in a stagnating economy. Rotational power cuts, intermittently applied since 2008, are at their most intense ever with blackouts having occurred consecutively for more than 100 days. Read: President Ramaphosa’s deputy set to go in SA cabinet revamp Ramaphosa, 70, who won a second term as head of the African National Congress in December, needs to replace his transport minister, who’s taking up an executive role in the party, and fill the vacant post of public service and administration minister. He’s also expected to replace his deputy president, who resigned after being ousted from the matching role in the ANC, and is being urged to shake up ministries that oversee the provision of energy, freight rail, and port services. “Many investors simply don’t believe our plans,” Busa said in the letter. “To shift this view, they will need to see consistent” delivery, the organisation said. Vincent Magwenya, Ramaphosa’s spokesman, declined to comment. Busa named six ministries it feels need “special attention,” and laid out the group’s concerns about them as follows: Ramaphosa was also urged to cut the size of the cabinet by merging ministries such as sports and tourism and to put in place “forward looking, energetic and effective ministers.” A government assessment, which was released on Saturday, of pledges made by Ramaphosa in last year’s state-of-the-nation address showed that targets of adding significant amounts of new power generation were missed and promised tenders for gas-fired power and battery storage weren’t held. Eskom, the state power utility, on Sunday advertised for a new chief executive officer after Andre de Ruyter, its current leader, said in December he was stepping down at the end of March. With applications due in by February 27 the company may be without a permanent CEO in April. Read all our Eskom coverage here.