Jy kan ook hier na die potgooi op iono.fm luister. This transcript is a translation from the original interview conducted in Afrikaans, which aired on RSG Geldsake, here.  TINUS DE JAGER: Economists see damning evidence of any investment in the listed property market here in South Africa [being negative]. While it is predicted that interest rates are going to start flattening out, even though they are at their peak, there are concerns that we have still not seen the full consequences of the increases, even though they may not increase much from here. Forecasts for business premises, shops and the residential property are negative, with a similar flattening predicted to 2023, even should interest rates cause fixed-property owners to be more cautious. We are chatting with John Loos, property economist at FNB. Good evening, John, welcome to the programme. How has an investment in South African property compared with one overseas in the past five years? JOHN LOOS: It’s difficult to generalise with those overseas, those in many countries. I have looked at the commercial sector, and rates of return in the past – or until 2020/2021. We have the figures for those two years, and it appears we were one of the weaker performers, together with Canada, interestingly. The US and much of Western Europe did better than we did. So it would appear that we were on the weak side. When it comes to residential, for example, FNB home-price growth never went much above 4%, but the US sometimes swung into double digits during the period of lockdowns. There was much talk of house price bubbles in much of the developed world, just before interest rates again started to rise. In South Africa there were none of these speculative bubbles. Things were much stronger after the lockdown as a result of interest-rate cuts in 2020, though that was no boom, I might say. TINUS DE JAGER: So what factors are driving us down? After all, we have all been through these restrictions – Canada, the US and South Africa – and we all experienced relief from the restrictions at much the same time. How can this be explained? JOHN LOOS: Well, we have had a longer-term economic stagnation; from about a decade ago economic growth began to slow down. There had been a slight recovery after the financial crisis, up until 2012, and then from around 2012 there has been a broad slowdown and eco stagnation in economic growth. Forget about the Covid lockdown. Yes, it was unique, but despite that we are busy stagnating. In many global countries this may not have been so; this is because of the structural we have here. The major difficulty at present is the electricity crisis. So yes, we are now seeing the same high inflation as the rest of the world; interest rates have risen considerably as in the rest of the world; we also have had a Covid lockdown recession like the rest of the globe. But we have other factors as well, caused by how our economy is managed, our structural problems, and the electricity-supply crisis which further dampens our economy – and property, after all, is all about the economy. TINUS DE JAGER: John, does this then mean that an investment in property anywhere in South Africa would be bad? I see that the Western Cape is however showing growth. JOHN LOOS: I think, first, we are currently experiencing a longer-term correction for property. One does not always recognise the correction in value. Much takes place in real terms. So in other words over many years you will see very low house-price growth or commercial valuations that do not keep pace with inflation, and in real terms that’s a long slowdown. Between 2021 and 2016, for example, capital values of commercial property fell by 25% in real terms. House prices also slowed in 2015/2016 in reaction to the longer-term economic stagnation, and I think we will be in that corrective phase for some years to come. Once the correction ends it could be time to buy again – much like in 1998 when property prices were at rock bottom. That was the best time of your life to buy, after which prices rose a couple of hundred percent. But we are now on a path of correction so it’s not a great time nationally. I do think as a result of semigration, the Western Cape – with its better economic management of the region and those municipalities – will perform better residentially and commercially for the next couple of years, because its economy should do better that the rest of the country. But let’s not get too excited with the Western Cape. It is also subject to things like the electricity crisis and all those South African problems. So it won’t be a massive heyday for property over the next couple of years, not even in the Western Cape, in my view. TINUS DE JAGER: And the future for the industry? You have referred to 2023 – what about a little longer ahead? JOHN LOOS: I think we need considerable changes to economic policy, and I believe we’ll see those in the next few years. But that is longer term. I believe policy will change, the private sector will be allowed to have larger participation in many sectors, such as electricity, and then we could perhaps see the best part of the decade ahead perform significantly better economically, and property can turn around. I think it’s hard to say when. I think for the meanwhile and for the next few years we’ll see an average to weaker property market, because of weaker economic performance. Economic policy first needs to improve significantly, as well as the economy. TINUS DE JAGER: John, did you however see a small recovery after the lifting of the Covid restrictions? JOHN LOOS: Yes, especially for industrial. Industrial property is the so-called darling of commercial property and has done very well globally, as well as here. Logistical demands, as a consequence of more online retail, benefit industrial property. That did very well after Covid – even a bit before Covid. Retail was average, and offices were the weakest of the three. But they have all improved a lot since the lockdown. The lockdown period was a very poor year. It was very difficult to do business during that year. TINUS DE JAGER: Thank you very much, John. That was FNB property economist John Loos.