South Africa’s headline consumer inflation slowed to 6.9% year on year in January from 7.2% in December, statistics agency data showed on Wednesday, in line with analysts’ forecasts. On a month-on-month basis, consumer inflation was at -0.1% in January, compared with 0.4% in the previous month, also as predicted by economists polled by Reuters. The latest inflation figures provide further evidence that price pressures in Africa’s most industrialised economy are easing, after annual inflation struck a 13-year high of 7.8% year on year in July last year. The South African Reserve Bank has raised interest rates at its last eight monetary policy meetings. Read:
Sarb lifts repo rate by 25bps
What the repo rate hike means for bond, vehicle debt But the central bank, which targets inflation of between 3% and 6%, raised rates by a smaller 25 basis points last month, as it cut its economic growth forecasts because of crippling power cuts. Core inflation, which excludes prices of food, non-alcoholic beverages, fuel and energy, was at 4.9% year on year in January, from 4.9% the previous month, Statistics South Africa said. Read: Food prices hit 14-year high as load shedding escalates On a month-on-month basis core inflation was at 0.2% in January, compared with 0.2% in December. Comments FNB Senior Economist Koketso Mano said the data points to headline inflation remaining unchanged in February. “We should see upward monthly pressure driven by the lift in fuel prices, as well as survey outcomes on health-related services that should lift core inflation. “Throughout 2023, fuel inflation should soften relative to last year, albeit at a slower pace than previously anticipated given the expected lift in oil demand that should follow China’s reopening. Food inflation should be sticky given elevated local input costs. Core inflation should continue to lift as second-round effects permeate the consumer basket. On average for this year, we predict headline inflation of 5.8%.” Johannes Khosa and Nicky Weimar of Nedbank’s Group Economic Unit also believe inflation will continue to trend lower off a higher base throughout 2023, but warn that risks to the inflation outlook remain on the upside. They also predict a more positive trend for food inflation. “Local food prices have lagged the moderation in global prices, but they are probably near their peak and should start moderating in coming months….good summer rains will support the local crop harvest.” Brent crude prices potentially staying at higher levels due to geopolitical tensions interrupting supply, the rand remaining vulnerable to global economic uncertainties, the steep electricity tariff increase as well as higher input costs due to load-shedding, “could cause inflation to moderate at a slower pace than expected,” according to the Nedbank unit. “Our base view is for inflation to fall below the upper end (6%) of the Sarb’s target around May and to average 5.5% for 2023….We forecast one more interest rate hike of 25 bps in March, which will take the prime lending rate to a peak of 11%. We do not expect any rate cuts this year due to the upside risks to the inflation outlook.”