 You can also listen to this podcast on iono.fm here. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: Stokvels have been a great way for South Africans to save for different goals, whether it’s back-to-school expenses, funeral costs, groceries for the December-January period – or even travel. And for those who struggle to save by themselves, stokvels are a great way to have a supportive circle that keeps you disciplined. In the spirit of reaching our financial goals this year, which is a resolution that many people have, I thought we’d look at how we can up our stokvel game and venture into investments. Francois le Clus, an independent financial advisor at attooh! Financial Wellness, joins us on this episode to offer us the lowdown on starting an investment stokvel. Welcome, Francois. FRANCOIS LE CLUS: Hi, Tumi. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: Francois, let’s say a group of friends has decided to start this investing stokvel. How do they go about formalising it? Would they require a founding document, and should they elect a representative for it? FRANCOIS LE CLUS: Yes, that’s a great question and I think you should start right there. It’s also called a constitution, this founding document. Basically what it entails is it shows all the objectives of the stokvel, the terms of reference, membership requirements – meaning how many members are allowed on this stokvel – the investment strategy, everything that’s formal. All the formalities need to be right in there, and this needs to go over to the administrator. And yes, they need to appoint a representative person and this person will need to get all the Fica [Financial Intelligence Centre Act] documentation from all the members. They will need to open up a bank account for the stokvel. So it’s quite a duty. So yes, they definitely need to get a representative person. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: Would that representative be someone who has a bit of financial knowledge? FRANCOIS LE CLUS: I would definitely recommend that, and somebody who has a bit of an administrative background, because all the formalities are quite big. You need to have all the ID numbers, the full names, the proof of banking of all the individuals, the proof of address. You need all of that information on hand the whole time, so you need to be able to give that to the bank. Administratively, you need someone who has a little bit of background on that side. And then, as well, when we’re looking at the investment strategy side, you need someone who can obviously lead the stokvel, lead the members, to explain to them a little what high risk is, what low risk is, what medium risk is, and the term of the investment, stuff like that. So I would definitely recommend getting someone on board there or having a representative who has the admin background as well as the financial knowledge. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: And is there an ideal maximum number of members for an investment stokvel? FRANCOIS LE CLUS: There isn’t an ideal maximum member count. I would definitely say the biggest thing when it comes to stokvels – or investor clubs as they call them – is the assets. The larger the assets become, the lower the fees become on a platform. You can negotiate fees with the fund manager. So what you’re looking at is, with a pool of investments you actually want larger asset sizes to be able to take advantage of lower fees. So the biggest point that we’re looking for is larger assets so that you can negotiate better fees. So yes, if we can get 1 000 members on the stokvel, that’ll be awesome. Good luck to the representative, because he or she is going to have their hands very, very full with this stuff. But yes, we’re looking for assets there. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: And just staying on the administrative duties, we know that using a member’s personal bank account for the club fund is risky. Is it possible to open a stokvel account with a bank, and what is the process for that? FRANCOIS LE CLUS: As you said, [a personal bank account] is risky. It’s beyond risky. It’s definitely reckless. Somebody’s definitely going to run away with money at some stage if it’s in their bank account. I can promise you that. So yes, one of the formalities of the stokvel or the investment club is that a bank account needs to be opened in the name of the club or the stokvel. What the bank will need is the founding document or the constitution. They will need the list of all the members, plus obviously all their details, and their Fica documentation. So you’ll start with that, the representative’s – his or her – Fica documentation. So that’s ID, proof of bank, proof of address, and the resolution letter that needs to be signed by all the members. Now this resolution letter gives the representative authority to act on behalf of the stokvel or the investors’ club. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: And would the same documents be required by the investment administrators? FRANCOIS LE CLUS: Yes, 100%. So again we’re looking at the founding document, or the constitution as they call it. You will need that letter, or the representative, or the election document, all the investors’ details, the bank statement then of the stokvel, and the Fica documents of the representatives. So ID, proof of residence and proof of banking. Remember, those documents shouldn’t be older than three months. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: And which investment vehicles are available to these stokvels? FRANCOIS LE CLUS: We’ve a very, very wide array of different funds that can be used. So you can use an ETF, which is an exchange-traded fund. You can use a normal unit trust manager, you can use a money market account. There are loads and loads of investment vehicles for different goals that the stokvel might have. So if the stokvel’s idea is for capital growth over a long term, let’s say a 10-year period, they’ll typically have to have a look at an ETF fund, something high equity, Nasdaq 100 or a FTSE fund, an S&P. There are so many funds that you can use. If the funds are more short-term, then you’re going to have to look at a money market account because [that looks] at capital protection and a little bit of upside growth. So again, that’s where that whole leadership thing comes in with the representative who can lead the whole group and get the right fund for the group’s objectives. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: Would the contributions to the club be determined by which funds the stokvel is invested in? FRANCOIS LE CLUS: Not the fund itself. Let’s say they want to invest in the Satrix MSCI World Index Feeder Fund. This will go through an administrator. Now the administrator has a minimum regular contribution. Some administrators have a R1 000 contribution, some have a R500 minimum contribution. So, depending on the administrator, the administrator has a minimum amount, a regular amount that needs to be paid, but the fund itself doesn’t have a minimum amount per month. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: And Francois, what is the best way to handle distributions of funds? FRANCOIS LE CLUS: That will basically be in the constitution; that’ll be outlined in the constitution document. Let’s say the investors want an income, or they want the distributions to be paid out to them, [then] the dividends and the interest need to be paid out to them – on a monthly, quarterly, biannual or annual basis. They can choose when it needs to be paid out. But yes, if the constitution says every month we are going to pay out the interest, then that’ll be split between the various members. So if we’ve 10 members in there who made the same contributions towards the stokvel, that will be split up equally – the interest and dividends will be split up equally between the 10 members. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: Francois, I just want to find out what you think would be the best way to pay out? Would it be monthly, or is it better to maybe look at it yearly, just so that you get the benefit of long-term investing? FRANCOIS LE CLUS: For the benefit of long-term investing I would probably say not to have the funds paid out, to have the dividends obviously be paid back into the fund, to roll up back into the fund, and the interest as well. But, again, different stokvels will have different goals. If you’re looking at the long term, don’t let the money be paid out; let it roll up into the fund and then you can obviously get that interest on interest on interest the whole time that we want. And if you’re invested so that you can get a monthly income or quarterly income, then obviously you’ll have to be invested in more short-term funds, stuff like that. So again, it comes down to what the stokvel’s aims and objectives actually are, and that’ll be set out in the constitution document. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: And are there any tax implications that members need to be aware of? FRANCOIS LE CLUS: Definitely. I think that’s very important. The money is grouped together, so people might think, okay, we’re going to be taxed as a group or a special scheme or something like that. In actual fact, you will still be taxed as an individual. So dividend-withholding tax at 20% will still have to be paid. This tax is paid directly to Sars [South African Revenue Service] by the issuers. So you don’t actually have a problem with that, you’ll just see the 80% coming to you. Tax on interest – you’ll still pay that. So if your interest is more than R23 800 and you are younger than the age of 65, you’ll pay tax on interest over and above this amount. So you’re still taxed as an individual. I think that’s very, very important to understand. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: And regarding terminations, of a member wants to leave the stokvel, how would this be handled by it? FRANCOIS LE CLUS: Well, this person would have to say [so] at the meeting. So again, having a look at the constitution, the constitution will say how many meetings are [to be] held, or the frequency of them. And then at this meeting, the person will have to say: ‘Listen, I would like to disinvest, I don’t want to be part of this, we need to cancel this.’ This needs to be notarised by the secretary. The treasurer will have to make sure that the funds are paid out and distributed to the person who is leaving the stokvel. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: And how would a member’s benefits be handled should they pass away? FRANCOIS LE CLUS: Again, a very, very good question. So this doesn’t just dissolve or form part of the total stokvel, and off you go. Sorry, this is as for an individual. Just like your tax on an individual basis, this, or your part of the stokvel, will form part of your estate. This means we have to make sure that we’ve got a valid last will and testament, because the funds will need to be allocated to your beneficiaries or whomever you like to nominate. That will then go through your estate, through your will and the executor, and be distributed to those beneficiaries. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: Francois, just lastly, do you think stokvels would benefit from working with a financial advisor? FRANCOIS LE CLUS: I definitely think so. I think it’s very important to get a second opinion and make sure that the right choices are made, especially when it comes to investing. Different portfolios have different timeframes attached to them. So if we’re looking at equity funds, you need to invest for longer than seven years. In 2022 we had a horrible year in the markets. If the idea had been for capital stability and capital protection and you were invested in equities, you would’ve been very, very mad at that stage because the capital amount would’ve gone down. So it’s very important to get a second opinion from a financial advisor who can guide you in the right direction when it comes to your objectives as a stokvel, the timeframe that you are looking at, and obviously matching that with a certain fund. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: And would you say that [the stokvel] should meet with the financial advisor on an annual basis? FRANCOIS LE CLUS: I even think every six months they must have a chat with their financial advisor. I think it’s very, very important to keep your finger on the pulse, know what’s going on in the markets, know if there are any switches that need to be made, any strategy changes that need to be looked at. So I would definitely say every six months have a chat with a financial advisor. It doesn’t need to be a very long-winded conversation; just have a chat, and make sure that you are still on the right path, still invested in the right funds for the objective of the stokvel. BOITUMELO NTSOKO: Thank you so much, Francois, for joining us on this episode. That was Francois le Clus, an independent financial advisor at attooh! Financial Wellness.