The Financial Intelligence Centre (FIC) announced changes to two sets of regulations early this year, to plug some holes in the legislation and prevent SA from being flagged as a haven for those with nefarious intentions by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). FATF is the global watchdog that aims to prevent money laundering and terrorist financing. The changes relate to the FIC Act and schedules to the FIC Act – and as the FIC explains in a statement following enquiries from Moneyweb “have been made in order to align with the FATF standards regarding the coverage of business activity by entities designated in the FATF Standards”. Read: Strong anti-money laundering rules, supervision critical to SA’s reputation “These changes also contribute to addressing some of the deficiencies identified during the mutual evaluation as part of actions to prevent SA from being grey listed,” it adds. “The changes which have been implemented are important as part of SA’s regime in terms of alignment to the FATF standards, which is the basis on which all countries are assessed in the combating of money laundering and the financing of terrorism and proliferation.” It notes that the 2021 mutual evaluation of SA “identified significant weaknesses in parts of the country’s regime”. “The scope of these enhancements have been in the pipeline over several years, and included consultations with relevant industries, sectors, supervisory bodies and other stakeholders.” Unfortunately, the amendments place a bigger burden on businesses to detect and report financial transactions, or as the FIC puts it, “have significantly increased the number of accountable institutions” under the act. “This increased sectoral coverage will enhance the scope of information made available to the FIC for supervision and analysis,” it says. International transfers The first of these changes, to Section 31 of the FIC Act, concerns cross-border electronic transactions. This section relates to the reporting of electronic cross-border transactions exceeding the prescribed threshold of R20 000, that have to be reported by all institutions authorised to deal in foreign currency. The threshold of R20 000 and anything above is a rather low if one considers that is it barely $1 100 and way less than £1 000. “The promulgation of section 31 introduces a new reporting stream to the FIC, namely international funds transfer reports (IFTRs),” says the FIC. “IFTRs will provide insights on the money flows associated with international organised crime syndicates, transnational money laundering and a broad range of other crimes with international footprints such as trade-based money laundering, human and illicit goods trafficking and tax evasion. “These reports will assist the FIC in its work of interpreting and analysing transaction information to develop financial intelligence. It will also help the FIC to assist in the tracking and freezing of criminal and/or terrorist assets.” The reports will form part of other regulatory reporting streams currently in place, namely cash threshold reports (transactions of R50 000 and above), suspicious and unusual transaction reports, and terrorist property reports. The FIC says it interprets and analyses the information provided in these regulatory reports to develop financial intelligence that is shared with law enforcement, prosecutors and other competent authorities for their investigations, prosecutions and asset forfeiture applications. Dealers in expensive goods The second set of tweaks to the act relates to the reporting requirements of what the FIC terms “high-value goods dealers”. “The changes will significantly increase the number of sectors included as accountable institutions in Schedule 1 to the FIC Act. This increased sectoral coverage will enhance anti-money laundering, combating the financing of terrorism and countering proliferation financing, thereby addressing the scope of coverage weaknesses identified in the 2009 and 2019 Financial Action Task Force (FATF) mutual evaluations of South Africa,” according to the statement. The FIC says the additional sectors will improve its ability “to obtain information concerning the financial activities of customers from a wider range of financial, non-financial institutions, and crypto asset service providers.” “Furthermore, this will enrich and help augment the quality of financial intelligence reports the FIC provides to law enforcement, supervisory bodies and policy formulating entities.” The inclusion of new sectors will require more businesses to register with the FIC as accountable institutions and fulfil certain regulatory obligations, such as: In particular, the FIC expanded the list of dealers in expensive goods that will have to report transactions above R100 000. The list includes dealers in new and used cars, boats, precious metals and stones, antiques, fine art, and aircraft – with the FIC particularly saying that the published list is “not exhaustive”. Once again, the threshold of reporting all transactions of R100 000 and above is rather low, considering that the cheapest new car in SA is priced at closer to R200 000. “A high-value goods dealer, as listed in Item 20 under Schedule 1 to the FIC Act, is defined as a ‘person who carries on the business of dealing in high-value goods in respect of any transaction where such a business receives payment in any form to the value of R100 000 or more, whether the payment is made in a single operation or in more than one operation that appears to be linked’ and where ‘high-value goods’ means any item that is valued in that business at R100000 or more,” says the FIC. It explains that a person or entity that falls under the definition of a high-value goods dealer is considered an accountable institution and is obliged to meet all FIC Act obligations, including regulatory reporting obligations. “These regulatory reporting obligations include filing suspicious and unusual transaction reports pertaining to a transaction or activity of any value (there is a zero threshold applicable), cash threshold reports on cash transactions of R50 0000 and above and terrorist property reports. “Where the business receives a portion of payment in relation to high value goods in cash, and this cash amount exceeds the cash reporting threshold, the dealer must report this to the FIC. “For example, motor vehicle costs R150 000 and is therefore a high value good. The client pays R50 000 in cash and the remaining balance via EFT. The R50 000 cash payment would exceed the cash threshold and is reportable to the FIC. Krugerrands Krugerrands deserve a special mention as they are easy to buy, transport and sell. That a small coin is worth more than R30 000 makes it very attractive to people who want to hide cash or break a paper trail. The FIC says the R50 000 threshold for reporting cash transactions applies to each transaction, and also “where a client appears to structure payments across one or more days and in a manner to avoid the transactions being reported under cash threshold reporting”. Then the accountable institution must file a suspicious and unusual transaction report. Dealers ‘vulnerable to abuse’ In an earlier discussion document calling for public input, the FIC said that dealers in goods of high value are vulnerable to abuse by criminals for money laundering, terrorist financing and proliferation financing. “Trends indicate criminals often seek to buy high-value goods with the proceeds of crime. Therefore, it is vital to regulate the high-value goods sector which includes, among others, certain motor vehicle dealers and dealers in precious metals and dealers in precious stones. “The definition does not specify the form in which the transaction is made, and therefore includes all payment types e.g. cash, cheque, electronic funds transfers, credit card payments and crypto payments. “This list is not exhaustive,” it adds. The discussion document stated that businesses also need to report any transactions that might be suspicious, even if such transactions are not reportable in terms of a cash or value threshold. “Should a transaction be considered suspicious or unusual, there would be a regulatory reporting obligation in terms of section 29 to the FIC Act,” confirms the FIC in its statement. It adds that dealers need to look out for transactions that do not make economic sense, transactions that seem irrational, involves large cash payments, or those that are structured to avoid detection. Listen to Ryk van Niekerk discussing how SA might stay off the grey list with Intellidex founder Stuart Theobald (or read the transcript here): 