 SIMON BROWN: I’m chatting now with David Fraser, executive chairman at Peregrine Capital. David, I appreciate your early morning time. I chatted with your colleague last year, Jacques Conradie, around Thungela, and how you had cut the position but, when the war broke out in Ukraine you had added to it. Read/listen: Thungela lesson: How to spot a mispriced share In your letter that came out just a week or so back, you were saying you had taken the money on Thungela at above R300/share. What was the logic for exiting? DAVID FRASER: Morning Simon, and morning to your listeners. I think obviously the share has had a fantastic run. We’ve monitored a lot of different moving parts in Thungela, and one is the exchange rate. Obviously more important is the coal price and the forward coal curves. And then obviously the performance of Transnet as well. I think since we initiated the position right after its listing in 2021, we’ve continued to decrease our coal volume exported because of the issues [at] Transnet. So I think certainly over R300/share, once we banked the final dividend of R60 in September last year we just felt that the risk/reward profile was running out of space, and we decided to exit our position. We still think it’s a fantastic company, and probably one of the better run companies in South Africa. If we look at what management teams in South Africa have to deal with, I don’t think we give enough credit to our management teams. We have a lot of fantastic management teams who have to deal with so many circumstances that perhaps other Western companies don’t have to deal with, particularly external to their business – whether it’s Eskom or water challenges or municipal challenges, or in this case Transnet challenges. SIMON BROWN: I want to touch on managers in a moment, because I agree with you. I think we have some of the best in the world, and lots of them, to be quite frank. But quickly on Thungela – one of the key things is the discipline. It’s actually something that’s surprisingly hard to do. Certainly, in my experience, you’ve got a stock, it’s done beautifully well for you. I can’t even run the numbers; what’s it, a 15-bagger, a 20-bagger like a year, and some change? It’s that discipline to say, you know what, we like the stock, it’s a great business. But this price is stretched and it’s time to take some money. DAVID FRASER: We got into Thungela very early. I think our first buy was around R28/share. Since then we’ve had R78 out in dividends already, and it is obviously at R300/share. As you say, it has been just an incredible performer. But I do think that you can’t overstay the welcome. We did play the coal situation. Well, we had an unforeseen uplift from the Russian invasion of Ukraine, which obviously gave coal prices a significantly higher impetus, and on the back of that we felt that that things would somewhat normalise. Again, we have a model that we run, and we have a target price. Once it reaches that target price, if nothing else changes, then we do have to have the discipline to sort of exit the positions. We think Thungela is a great company. We know it well; we understand it well. It was an interesting deal they did on Friday. Never say never. Perhaps we’ll be back in this one if our valuation screen tells us that it screens well again. Again, discipline is important in investments and particularly you can never fall in love with a stock I think once your model tells you that, given the current circumstances, it’s reached fair value. In our portfolios we really don’t try and hold a lot of things that are at fair value. We’d rather keep a portfolio of shares that continue to show upside, and we’d rather be in cash, waiting for opportunities, than hold shares that we think are kind of fair value. SIMON BROWN: I take your point on that. The Australian [Thungela’s Ensham Coal Mine] deal – I’m going backwards and forwards on it, but it looks like a well-priced deal, and it looks like a fairly good payback period. I know a lot of folks say Australia’s a graveyard for South African stocks, but we’ve done some good deals there. Super Group springs to mind. Let’s change tack to OUTsurance because OUTsurance in many ways was kind of like a Thungela. Thungela suddenly arrived in the market out of Anglo, and OUTsurance suddenly arrived in the market as other bits sort of exited the holding and then changed their names [from Rand Merchant Investment Holdings] in December. It has also done really well as the market kind of adjusts to what’s actually a really good operation. DAVID FRASER: Yes. I think that we’ve tracked OUTsurance for many, many years. It wasn’t a part of the mix before then, obviously not a visible part of the mix. So we’ve done some work in OUTsurance, even when it was just an investment in that stable rather than the main focus. So it certainly was a company that we’d done ongoing work on for many, many years and understood that this company’s track record was absolutely exemplary in the South African market. We have a very motivated and incentivised management team that have a significant stake in their business. Certainly our understanding was that they were probably the best executors in this market. So we were excited to see it coming and effectively being sort of reshaped as a core listing itself. Again, we positioned our funds to take advantage of that. We thought the market would like it once it saw it, once it understood it. But again, the OUTsurance road is a long road. We probably analysed the company for certainly six or seven years, and certainly knew a lot about it before it sort of exposed itself as a separate listed entity. I think that’s what it’s about. It’s about doing work before everybody else, understanding companies before everyone else, and perhaps even meeting the management team to understand what these businesses are and what they have achieved. So I think that’s another situation. Obviously as a hedge fund, we can synthesise buying the OUTsurance rump even before it was separately listed, by effectively shorting out some of the underlying other businesses in the mix. I mean, again, that was something that we did very successfully last year, and OUTsurance remains a position in our fund right now. So we are excited about their outlook and excited about their execution. SIMON BROWN: A quick last question. Back to management. As you say, we have some great management teams in South Africa. Load shedding is really, really tough, although I suspect that perhaps for a lot of our listed stocks it is easier than it is for the mom-and-pop [companies]. But if I look at Shoprite spending half a billion on diesel, my first question is the logistics behind that. We’ve got great managers in South Africa. DAVID FRASER: Yes. I think this is the big challenge right now. I think underlying we’re excited about the South African market. But for the load shedding I think everybody was ready to get out off to the races this year. I think we have great management teams and, again, very modest valuations. But the management teams have got to adjust to this new normal. Certainly our base case is that we are going to have – I don’t think it’s Level 2, but between Level 4 and Level 6 probably for the next 18 months…. We’ve spent probably more than R400 billion on these two [new] power stations, and five out of the 12 units are out [of commission] for the next 12 to 18 months. You just couldn’t make this stuff up. So the management teams are going to have to adapt to this new normal. Unfortunately what it means is a pretty significant increased cost that I think is going to have to be passed on to consumers and customers. Again, it’s going to test these business models on whether there is an ability to recover this cost through increased pricing – which unfortunately is going to lead to perhaps another wave of almost structural inflation in South Africa. It’s more of a supply shock rather than a demand pull. So one would hope that the Reserve Bank would look at that carefully and understand the dynamics between that and, again, not punish us with higher interest rates because of the structural issue that we’ve got to all sort of adjust. But it’s going to be about the ability of companies to recover this increased cost – which I think is semi-structural, certainly for the next 18 months – from their pricing power. The good companies, the companies that have relevant products will be able to do this, and there are a lot of companies that [can’t]. Just talking to, for example, Hudaco last week, who performed incredibly well and had a very strong set of [annual] results again, they said they just see a lot of competition falling over, a lot of smaller businesses falling over. So I think unfortunately bigger will become better. I think they’re the companies that have the ability and the cash flows to put in the sort of structural generators and whatever they need to cope with this problem. But again, it just says it certainly is not easy being a South African manager; there’s so much more thrown at you than in the rest of the world. I think hats off to a lot of our resilient management teams out there. I don’t think we give them enough credit, certainly where I sit behind a desk playing with numbers. These are real issues that they’ve got to deal with and real frustrations. So kudos to them. SIMON BROWN: I take the point. It’s tough. It’s always been tough, but perhaps it’s tougher than usual. David Fraser, executive chairman of Peregrine Capital, I appreciate the time.