A study by the Casual Workers Advice Office shows strike activity falling to levels last seen in 2014, most of them related to wages and related issues. Its Strike Barometer 2022 shows there were 86 strikes in 2022, of which 51 were wage-related. The strike total for 2022 is 27% lower than 2020 and 48% lower than 2018. The second-highest cause of strikes in 2022 (19 out of a total 86) related to the demand for permanent employment. “The actual demand for permanent employment by casual or labour-broker workers is higher than this because this barometer has not included the number of pickets and workplace-related actions held by casual workers in the official number of strikes (for example, where casual workers picketed at a workplace when they were off duty or after the contract of the labour broker who hired them had been terminated,” says the study. Source: Strike Barometer 2022, Casual Workers Advice Office Some 48 strikes were ‘protected’ and 38 ‘unprotected’, which is a reversal of prior years when unprotected strikes exceeded the number of protected strikes. A protected strike is one that complies with the Labour Relations Act (LRA), meaning workers are protected from dismissal for strike activity. An unprotected strike is one where the requirements of the LRA are not met and strikers are not protected from dismissal. A ‘wildcat strike’ is one where strike action is carried out without the support of the trade union, and generally does not follow LRA procedures. A total of 26 of the 38 wildcat strikes were in the public sector. Some 17 of the 38 unprotected strikes were by non-unionised workers. “This goes somewhat against the pattern of recent years, which has witnessed a growing proportion of strikes by such workers,” states the barometer. ‘Crassly anti-working class’ reports The Casual Workers Advice Office says although the Department of Employment and Labour (DEL) produces an annual industrial action report “these reports are consistently and crassly anti-working class, and do not register the significance of strikes from a movement building perspective”. The barometer is based on the DEL reports, which are based on information supplied by employers, as well as trade union websites, WhatsApp groups and other sources. It says there may be more strikes than reported in the barometer, particularly short strikes by non-unionised workers. By far the main reasons for the strikes were demands for improved wages and benefits, as well as demands for permanent jobs and unpaid bonuses. But there are a few interesting (albeit small) categories: protests against assassinations, load shedding and corruption. The barometer says 17 workers were either “assassinated while organising a strike, shot dead by private security hired by bosses during a strike, shot and injured by police or private security, or beaten, petrol bombed or had their property damaged”. Among the biggest strikes were: