South African mining company Kumba Iron Ore, whose profits plunged over 50% in the year ended 31 December 2022, says it is engaging the state on finding a solution to the operational crises at Transnet which are weighing on its business. “We are engaging with Transnet and [the] government to improve the stability and reliability of rail and port infrastructure as a matter of urgency,” CEO Mpumi Zikalala said on Tuesday. The company, which is Anglo American’s iron ore arm, reported a net profit fall of 55% to R19.7 billion, down from R43.7 billion in the previous comparable period. By 14:00 on Tuesday, the company’s share price had lost 3% to R530.67. Zikalala added that the country’s mining sector, which still enjoys global demand for its resources, depends on Transnet’s improved performance. “There is a strong demand for South African mining products in the world. For the mining sector, including Kumba, the industry’s ability to continue contributing significantly to the fiscus, sustained employment, and delivering far-reaching socio-economic benefits are inextricably linked to Transnet improving its operational performance,” said Zikalala. The state-owned freight, rail and logistics company, which is responsible for ferrying iron ore and other resources such as coal to other countries, has over the years faced major declines as a result if worsening operational efficiencies, financial trouble and a disintegrating rail infrastructure. Read:
Transnet taps private firms to run SA ports, railways
Transnet, Minerals Council join forces to tackle port and rail bottlenecks For Kumba, the effects of Transnet’s inefficiencies have shown in its latest financial results. Poor logistics, including strike action by its workers in October, resulted in ore railed to the Saldanha port falling 9% to 35.9 Mt. It said finished stock increased to 7.8 Mt, which limited space for further production due to a high build-up of stock at its mines. The low levels of finished stock at Saldanha port contributed to a 9% decline in sales volumes to 36.6 Mt, Kumb said. Read: Kumba says iron ore is piling up amid Transnet woes Revenue for the company fell 27% to R74 billion, down from R102 billion. Headline earning per share dropped 46% to 56.19 cents per share, compared with 103.65 cents per share in the previous comparable period. Kumba’s total production for the year decreased by 8% to 37.7 Mt, compared with 40.9 Mt in 2021, while production at Sishen came to 27.0 Mt, representing a reduction of 4% from 28.0 Mt in the previous year. At its Kolomela mine operations, the company saw a production decline of 17% to 10.7 Mt, which was hampered by feedstock constraints. “The largest impact has been from the ongoing rail constraints, including industrial action at Transnet and poor rail performance throughout the year,” Kumba said. “These challenges were partly mitigated by our operating efficiency strategy and improved plant feedstock, resulting in enhanced plant stability and a 12% increase in production in the second half from 19.9 Mt in the first six months of the year,” it said. Listen:
Chief Commercial Officer Bonginkosi Mabaso on Transnet Freight Rail and Kalagadi Mining entering a partnershipAfrican Rail Industry Association CEO Mesela Nhlapo on Transnet partnerships and debt plans