The South African government will continue paying out Covid-19 social relief of distress (SRD) grants until 31 March 2024, putting pressure on the country’s much-strained public finances. It is already spending over 50% of the national budget on social welfare costs. In his Budget Speech for the 2023/2024 financial year, Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana allotted as much as R36.1 billion to continue funding the R350 grant which was launched in 2020 to support poor households in the wake of the pandemic. For all our detailed and in depth Budget coverage click here. The South African government’s spending programme includes additional spending of R227 billion over the next three years, which will mainly be put towards the extension of the Covid-19 grants. Godongwana said the grants are the single biggest allocation in the government’s additional spending plans in the new financial year and that replacing the current Covid-19 grant without an affordable alternative poses a threat to South Africa’s fiscus. In his report to parliament, Godongwana said National Treasury is working with partner departments in reviewing options to provide appropriate social protection measures for South Africa’s working-age population. This could include replacing or complementing the current Covid-19 SRD grant. “Any permanent increase in expenditure, such as a new social grant, will need to be matched by permanent revenue increases or spending reductions elsewhere,” he said. In a pre-budget press briefing, Godongwana hinted that taxes could be raised to either improve the grant or convert it into a basic income grant when asked whether the upcoming national elections had any influence in his decision to not raise taxes. “I will raise taxes for different reasons … in case there’s a continuation of unfunded spending in order to close that gap … like, for argument’s sake, someone said, ‘We want to continue with the SRD [grant] … we want to increase the SRD, or we want to improve it and make it a basic income grant’, you’re also calling for me to tax you,” he said. He added that the government is continually discussing options for the grant and the state will make a decision in line with its commitment to sustainable public finances. The minister allocated a total of R248.4 billion for social grants, up R5.9 billion from the R233 billion last year. The growth in the social grants bill is largely driven by a R30 billion allocation used to fund inflation-linked increases across all categories. The old age grant increased by R100 to R2 090 and the disability grant increased by R105 to the same amount. Foster care and child support grants increased by R60 and R20 respectively, to R1 130 and R510. The government expects the number of social grant recipients to swell to 19.6 million, or about a third of South Africa’s population, up from 18.6 million people in the previous period.