My property was purchased in 2015 in Nelspruit for R758 500 including all fees and was rented out from mid-2016 after I moved abroad (note that I have not legally emigrated). I bought the property when its market value was R850 000 and believe the current market value to be similar today. I obtained a 100% access bond at an interest rate of prime less 0.35%. I have managed to maintain a level of savings in the bond to reduce the interest burden, which currently amounts to R330 000. Besides the rental income, I do not earn any other taxable income besides interest, dividends and profits on a share trading in South Africa. My foreign income is exempt, as I am below the R1.25-million threshold. Here is a summary of the current income and expenses: For the 2022 tax year, my total profit (without taking the bond instalment or interest into consideration) was R42 798; thus giving a return on investment (ROI) of 5.65%. I am 38 and not contributing to a retirement annuity fund but do make use of the tax-free investment contributions of R36 000 per annum. I also manage my own share portfolio of about R200 000 and have managed average returns of 15% over the past three years.  Dear reader, When calculating your return on investment (ROI), we have assumed that the value of your property keeps pace with inflation. We have also included a variable for tenant risk, and in this regard, we usually work on a 10% long-term average. We have further assumed that your income falls below the tax threshold and have included the costs that you provided: Kindly note that we have excluded the instalments to your bond and the interest from our calculation. Bear in mind that should we take the interest into account, your net return on investment would be lower until your bond is settled. Property as an asset class is expected to provide a long-term average return of inflation plus 4% to 6% per year. Given that the capital value of your property is assumed to grow by inflation, you would be looking to target a return on the rental of between 4% to 6%. Given the information that you have provided, it looks like your investment property is not meeting these return expectations, as you have indicated that the capital appreciation has been 0% over the past eight years. It is also important to consider some of the risk factors when looking at property as an investment, with liquidity and lack of diversification in particular being risk factors. Your capital value is essentially invested in a single property, in a single location, and in the domestic rental environment. These factors could increase the risk to your capital investment growth. In terms of liquidity, while you may not require access to the capital at this stage, should you ever need to access some of the capital value you would not be able to sell a piece of the property. You would be required to sell the entire property and it may not be at an opportune time. The access bond With regard to whether you should invest the cash in your access bond or settle the bond, keep in mind that the prime lending rate is currently at 10.75%, meaning that the additional savings within your bond are a guaranteed return of 10.4%. Your question leads us to believe that you don’t have much left on the bond in order to settle it. Factors to consider would be cash flow, the need to access capital in the future, your expected taxable income now and in future, and your investment planning needs. [If] you are in a position to settle the bond very soon, [it] would mean that you would have the additional cash flow to consider alternative investments to help you diversify your investment portfolio. Your tax position looks to be such that you are not able to take advantage of the interest repayments on the bond as you are not incurring taxable income. Knowing whether to settle your bond or invest the proceeds and retain your access bond will depend on a number of factors, some of which I have mentioned, and therefore this decision should be discussed in detail with a professional financial advisor. 