 You can also listen to this podcast on iono.fm here. JEREMY MAGGS: Earlier this year our guest said South Africa was – and I quote – ‘on a knife edge’, and only by ramping up the public-private sector collaboration that saved it from the worst of the pandemic can it be hauled back from the abyss. This is what I think: as a country we seem to be very adept at balancing on that knife, while standing at the edge of the abyss at the same time. Welcome to the Moneyweb podcast FixSA. My name is Jeremy Maggs. Now our guests in coming weeks are going to be asked some simple questions. How can we make things better? How do we improve matters? What’s the quickest way South Africa can become a competitive and successful nation? Martin Kingston is well known. He’s chair of Business for South Africa, B4SA, and he has some 40 years’ experience in the financial services industry. Here is the important part: he has also intermediated extensively between government and the private sector. So how would he fix South Africa? Martin, a very warm welcome to you. If we were on a knife edge, as you were reported as saying, how lacerated are we right now? MARTIN KINGSTON: I think we’re in a difficult place, Jeremy – and we all know with the ANC conference people are sitting, some eating their popcorn, some chewing their fingernails – and we’ve got to get through a period of political uncertainty. The reality, of course, is that we’ve got very significant challenges, all of which, as I’ve said previously, had been exacerbated by Covid: the unemployment, the poverty and inequality that we’re all very familiar with. And yet we also saw extraordinary efforts by society at large to come to the party, to bring their skills and expertise wherever possible. And so, I think, that the real solution is to find partnership models that work for everybody in a very clear, focused and appropriate way, as we did initially when Covid broke with the three work streams that Business for South Africa was involved with. So mobilising PPE (personal protective equipment) for the country, dealing with the need to provide support for people who are rendered unemployed, or indeed crafting an appropriate economic recovery strategy, and then with the vaccination rollout programme, where we work with government to design and then actually implement and operationalise that rollout programme. JEREMY MAGGS: Let’s get to the partnership model in just a moment, and how you unlock it, how you make it more efficient. What path does government need to forge, and what type of real leadership do we need – which doesn’t seem to be in place right now? MARTIN KINGSTON: We’ve identified, as business, a limited number of interventions where we can help. And I say that not because it’s business’s responsibility, but in all of these areas government needs to lead, exactly as you’ve said, and people feel that there need to be difficult decisions that are implemented aggressively and indeed comprehensively by government. They cannot cover the ‘waterfront’. The president has consistently said we don’t have a capable state, we need to capacitate it appropriately. But that means we need to prioritise a limited number of areas. So, we are very clear the government is committed, at least on paper, to structural reform. But we’ve seen many examples where it has sought to implement it, and there has been progress in that respect. We need to hold them to account. In fact, I would say, Jeremy, that holding people to account will be one of the absolute litmus tests of how effective the government up to 2024 will be, and the likelihood of it being re-elected with a majority. JEREMY MAGGS: When we talk about difficult decisions, I wonder to myself whether we have the solutions to implement those decisions, or are we simply afraid of taking tough decisions? And when I talk about ‘we’, I’m talking about government, I’m talking about the nation. MARTIN KINGSTON: Well, I can’t speak for government, although obviously as business we’ve worked very closely with them for many years. But from my perspective, there actually are two steps in this process. One is to take the difficult decision, to grasp the nettle and to face down enemies. We recognise there are many dissenting views, but in the final [analysis]– JEREMY MAGGS: Given [that] the tough decisions are always going to be unpopular to some constituencies. MARTIN KINGSTON: Of course, they’re going to polarise views, but that’s the nature of leadership. We can try and forge consensus. What has become apparent in South Africa is that consensus is a nice goal but unachievable with many of these areas of policy. We just need to take the decisions. We can go through what some of those might be – whether it’s in energy or logistics, whether it’s in dealing with crime and corruption, whether it’s in the implementation of new infrastructure. That’s the first step. The second step is we need to have the capacity, having taken those difficult decisions, to put them into effect, having the real skills experience, human and financial capital to be able to ensure that we can demonstrate that we can act effectively having taken those difficult decisions. JEREMY MAGGS: Let’s talk about what the big problems are, and what the fixes [are] in just a moment. But the one thing I do want to ask you is: Strategically what lessons were learnt from the management of the pandemic, which you were intimately involved in, that can be applied right now? MARTIN KINGSTON: Let me just give two or three examples. I think the first is strategically that in certain areas we do need to get consensus among key role-players. So, when we put in place the Covid grant, the R350 a month we’re familiar with, that ended up being extended to R60 billion to over six million people. There was a lot of arm-wrestling that took place behind the scenes. A lot of people were involved from government, but also business and, I have to say, from organised labour. We forged a compact and we were relentless, led by, I have to say, the late Robert Legh (chair and partner at Bowmans) who led that workstream for us. We were relentless in calling out non-performance. And the consequence was that over time we saw the results, the fruits of that labour. MARTIN KINGSTON: The second example is the need to bring PPE into the country. We didn’t have any. We can all remember that, but finding that actually we had the capacity if we repurposed existing facilities to produce some of that PPE ourself on a perfectly economically commercial basis, a viable basis. And the third, which I think is the most important, was working with government on, as I said, the design and then the development and implementation of operationalisation, if you like, of the vaccination-rollout programme. My personal view is we did it later than we ought to have done. Again, we could have taken decisions more quickly than was necessary because we would’ve saved both lives and livelihoods in the process. But, it was, when it was being rolled out, a very effective programme only through real collaboration and being prepared to both listen and then to act. JEREMY MAGGS: What is real collaboration? MARTIN KINGSTON: Well, I think real collaboration is recognising where each partner has different skills and capabilities. Interestingly, in all these areas that I’ve talked about, we didn’t have reams of documentation setting out the roles and responsibilities. It became apparent very quickly that we were in this challenging set of circumstances together, that the private sector could mobilise certain resources, expertise, infrastructure, skills and capabilities that the government or the public sector didn’t have. And they willingly worked with us. We were not going to claim credit for any of that, Jeremy. We were very happy for the country at large to claim credit, led by the government. Now in more tangible circumstances and areas I’m sure we will come to, there needs to be a much clearer set of delineated responsibilities between the parties, where we accept what it is that the private sector brings to the equation, and the roles and responsibilities of the public sector as well. And I have to say the government is, generally speaking, uncomfortable to relinquish responsibility – pretty much for anything. And that’s at the very heart of the conundrum here. JEREMY MAGGS: But what I’m also hearing you say, Martin Kingston, is that partnership is doable if there is a level of urgency, as we saw in the pandemic. So how do we make that level of urgency more addressable now, do you think? MARTIN KINGSTON: Well, I think that’s exactly right. We need to distinguish what needs to be done in the short and medium term and in the longer term. So, a level of urgency for me is short and medium term. It needs to be a crisis of a significant nature. It needs to impact upon everybody, rather than either a small sector of the country’s population or a particular sector of the economy, for example. The energy crisis that we’re confronted with today is a very good example. The water crisis is another example. [They are] universal, and [need] immediate intervention. Now, in some cases, immediate intervention won’t give us immediate relief from the problem, but we need to start to build confidence. My own assessment is that partnership is also about communication in an aligned, honest, transparent manner which can reinforce levels of trust, because we deliver what we say we’re going to deliver. And again, as a country, we’ve been poor at doing that. JEREMY MAGGS: Before you said the word ‘trust’, I’d written it down. We have a deficit there, don’t we? MARTIN KINGSTON: Yes. It’s a very interesting word, because it’s used, I think, rather loosely as representing a trust deficit between the public and the private sector. I don’t think that’s so. I think there’s a trust deficit in the country at large. Trust, in my view, as I said, is built by people delivering against their stated commitments. It’s as simple as that – that they do what they say they’re going to do, and they do it effectively, and indeed that people are held accountable or responsible for their commitments and their actions. What we haven’t seen to date has been a demonstration of that, particularly I have to say, in the public sector – but not only in the public sector. The second [level of urgency] is that some of this is ideological, which is: Are the public sector, political figures if you like, prepared to relinquish responsibility in clearly delineated areas for the private sector to play a role? I think that that’s perfectly possible, if it’s appropriately regulated. JEREMY MAGGS: All right, that’s the broad philosophical canvas that you’ve just painted for us. You’ve also mentioned crime, logistics, power, water. Let’s get straight to it then. What’s the biggest problem we need to fix right now? MARTIN KINGSTON: Well, today, other than the fact that we don’t have a consistent narrative, which I think is the biggest problem – JEREMY MAGGS: What does that mean? A consistent narrative? MARTIN KINGSTON: A consistent narrative means that, when we have an energy crisis, the government speaks with a single voice, that there’s a clear set of messages, that there is a common purpose that is properly and appropriately articulated by all role-players. Not just, by the way, by government, but also, I would say, by other social partners – by the private sector, by civil society. Let me give you an example. In the case of the vaccination rollout programme, we were very clear that we all needed to speak exactly the same language. We were speaking to different constituencies. All of us had a lot of coverage in all forms of media, whether in the public or the private sector, civil society, or organised labour. I mean, we worked relentlessly in making sure that we had a common script and we rolled it out repeatedly over the length of 2021, in particular. Maybe it should have carried on. Now, that is not happening with any of the areas that I’ve talked about just now – where there is a common understanding in the first place, alignment as to what the key messages should be and then communicating those messages, because actually we need, as I said, first and foremost to build confidence, and confidence is very, very tricky to build and very easy to destroy. JEREMY MAGGS: So, we need a common narrative. But within that desire you’ve also got to allow for a degree of contestation. That’s important. Do we over-contest sometimes? MARTIN KINGSTON: Correct. I think we do. I think that it’s part and parcel of our model of social behaviour in South Africa. We do over-contest, and I think that we allow too much engagement to try and seek consensus. It comes back to what we were discussing earlier. In the final analysis leaders need to take difficult decisions. They don’t necessarily need to be consensus decisions. JEREMY MAGGS: All right. So, let’s assume that we are striving towards fixing South Africa by developing this common narrative. Why are we unable then to develop it? Is that a divide of cooperation? Do you think that exists right now, simply too wide to breach? MARTIN KINGSTON: No, not at all. In fact, in the areas that I’ve talked about we are very committed as business to ensuring that we can both cooperate among ourselves as business and then collaborate effectively in support of government. Of all the areas that I’ve mentioned, first and foremost is the domain of the public sector. It’s not as though the private sector can just go out and build a road or build a power plant or solve the issues relating to water, or indeed take actions to address the issues of crime and corruption. First and foremost, that is the public sector. But can we work alongside and in support of them if we have a granular understanding of the problems, because the first thing is to agree what the problems are and what the solutions are, and the second is to implement them? Of course we can in each and every one of these areas. JEREMY MAGGS: So, let’s talk about the common narrative around electricity generation, if we can. People pathetically were celebrating the fact we’d reduced from Stage 6 to Stage 5. A small win, not that we can really see the difference. How do we find a common narrative, Martin Kingston, around electricity generation, because there are so many different constituencies within this debate, within this orbit, that are all saying different things. MARTIN KINGSTON: Well, I think that there are two issues, Jeremy. The first and foremost is to understand that in the immediate short term, there’s nothing that we can do other than reduce demand to solve the problem. We don’t have enough generating capacity, and the generating capacity that we do have is broken. Yes, it’s not effective and efficient. It needs to be fixed. It needs to be rehabilitated and maintained. We all, I think, understand that. But we need to manage expectations. There’s frankly no difference between Stage 6 and Stage 5 as far as the majority of the people in this country are concerned. And when Eskom puts out a notice, as it did earlier this week, to say ‘indefinite Stage 6’, indefinite in my book means for the foreseeable future – it doesn’t mean for the next 24 hours. So that’s what I mean about being clear about the messaging that we set out. Read all our Eskom coverage here. The second [thing] is we need to manage expectations in terms of how long it will take. The second is that there is no doubt we can bring new energy onto the grid in a relatively short timeframe, particularly with respect to renewables or embedded generation. We know and we understand that it’s starting to happen. We need to be clear about the timeframe so we can again manage people’s expectations. JEREMY MAGGS: What’s the timeframe? Twelve months? MARTIN KINGSTON: No, I think it’s longer than that. I think it’s 18 months to two years. And the more we try and accelerate the timeframe in our narrative and we don’t deliver, the more we will undermine our own credibility. So, I think that we need to swallow hard and recognise it’s going to take longer than we would like. The third thing is that we need to fix Eskom, and we can do that in part by making sure that there are resources, skills, and experience that reside, inter alia, not just in Eskom, because we know that it has lost capacity in the private sector, but in society at large. We need to mobilise that. Business, for example, has mobilised resources. It is seconding resources – an inadequate number in my opinion. That requires two aspects. One is a willingness on the part of Eskom or government to receive those resources. I think that we’ve seen a real change and a willingness to accept that there are skills, capabilities that can be harnessed and brought in-house. And second, a willingness on the part of society at large on behalf of the private sector to make those resources available. Not for a few weeks, but for the medium term, people who are prepared to roll their sleeves up and get involved – particularly but not only engineers and plant managers and so on and so forth. So, we’re seeing that start to happen, but it’s taking [too long]. JEREMY MAGGS: Almost a form of national service? MARTIN KINGSTON: Well, I think that actually national service is at the very centre of this, Jeremy. The only way that we’re going to fix South Africa is by mobilising all the skills and capabilities in society at large, and channelling them appropriately – which requires discipline, by the way. It’s very well for you and me to say let’s just mobilise the skills, but [with] the project management capabilities of making sure that we can identify and source those capabilities we can place them appropriately. We can give as individuals or as institutions the requisite support. We can sort out the issues between them and the host – whether a public sector, state-owned enterprise, or a ministry – and it takes time. And, I have to say, it takes courage, and people need to learn new ways of working with one another. JEREMY MAGGS: Do you think business is still willing to step up and play its role? Is it becoming increasingly frustrated, or simply involved in a survival game? MARTIN KINGSTON: Oh, I think that none of those are mutually exclusive, by the way. I think that business is extremely frustrated. Many businesses are indeed involved in a survival game. We know, for example, that in the case of transportation there are huge challenges in terms of the accumulation of working capital, because people cannot ship their goods or product to market, for example. But by the same token there’s not a business that I’ve spoken to that hasn’t agreed that they need to put their personal shoulder to the wheel. I think there’s immense goodwill available to be harnessed, even if they are irritated about the timeframe and don’t see immediate success. JEREMY MAGGS: So, what are they waiting for? MARTIN KINGSTON: Well, I don’t think they’re waiting for anything. I mean, we have found within Business for South Africa there’s no approach I’ve made, or we’ve made, myself and my colleagues, to sectors and to companies to ask for resources – and ‘resources’ isn’t money, resources is skills and capability, it is chief executives, boards, chair people, top management getting involved – not a single case where they haven’t done that. I think that the more we’re able to mobilise that type of support and demonstrate that we’re acting in good faith to government, the more traction we’ll get. JEREMY MAGGS: Is business not getting tired, though, of constantly answering this clarion call, and yet we still find ourselves in the same place? MARTIN KINGSTON: Yes, tired, and frustrated. Fatigue I think has set in all around. But unfortunately, what we all also accept, Jeremy, is that there’s no option. It is clear and acknowledged indeed by government that they don’t have the capacity; they must work with others to be able to achieve this. We’re going to have to try and keep on trying. It’s relentless. I think that we have all been sapped by the experience of certainly the last two years during Covid and coming out of Covid. The political uncertainty certainly again undermines confidence. But we all know, if we are dispassionate and objective, that the only way through this, regardless of how frustrating it is, is to work collaboratively with one another but much more importantly in support of and alongside government. JEREMY MAGGS: It’s hard for us to be dispassionate and objective, given the situation that we find ourselves in on so many fronts. We see so much anger, Martin, and despair – among pockets of optimism. I will concede some of our other guests on this podcast have said we need a national attitudinal change. How do we foster that? How do we make people more confident, more optimistic? MARTIN KINGSTON: I think it’s possible. Well, I agree that it would be nice to have a national attitudinal change that has to be led from the top. There’s only one top in this country, by the way. That’s the political party that has responsibilities, has been voted in to administer the running of the country on a day-to-day basis. Of course, business leadership must play a similar role. There’s no reason why chief executives and chairs, and many of the people who I’m sure have already spoken on your podcast, can’t and don’t step up to the plate, because they do. But that’s inadequate. They need to do so under the overall leadership of government. And we’re not just talking about words, we’re talking about action, as we discussed previously. I think that that will foster an attitudinal change. But it’s not about words, it’s about action. JEREMY MAGGS: Let’s assume then, Martin Kingston, that we make some progress in terms of crafting this common narrative, that things start to change – that old cliché that you can’t manage it unless you can measure it. So, what would define short-term wins, in this particular respect? MARTIN KINGSTON: I’m not sure that there are measurable short-term wins, I’m afraid, Jeremy, because for me the [first] key metric is GDP growth. That’s going to take time. We can measure it on a quarterly basis. We’ve got to, by the way, have common and agreed and objective measurement tools. The second [key metric] is we need to address is unemployment. We know that that’s the biggest single headwind, but one follows the other. Unless we have investment, unless we have sustainable GDP growth, we’re not going to create jobs in the country. So, we’re in for the long haul. I believe that the only way that we’re going to inspire confidence is by demonstrating that we have a credible route map, that we’re starting to make progress, that we don’t deviate from our chosen course and that we involve all key social partners. So, I would like to emphasise that when I talk about ‘social partners’, I’m not just talking about government and business. I am talking about organised labour. I am talking about civil society. I do support the approach that all those actors need to, broadly speaking, put their individual and collective shoulders to the wheel. JEREMY MAGGS: I end this podcast asking the same question to all the guests. It’s a bit future-focused, if you don’t mind. When you are talking to your children or your grandchildren, or whatever the case may be in say, 20, 25 years’ time, what are you going to tell them, Martin Kingston, about the early 2020s, and maybe their role as the next baton-holding generation? MARTIN KINGSTON: That is a very difficult question to answer, of course. My sense is that we are living in a very challenging time, both in South Africa and globally, probably unprecedented in any of our lifetimes, no matter how old you and I might be, Jeremy. I think that we owe it to our children and our grandchildren to leave them, as a legacy, a better environment, certainly in South Africa where we have some level of influence [rather] than globally. And one of the ways that we do that is by focusing on a behaviour that is responsible, one which has integrity, and where we ensure that we each do our very best for the good of the country, not just for ourselves. And I think that moving the focus away from what’s good for me to what’s good for everybody will be absolutely critical. And I’d like to endow not just my children and grandchildren but everyone else with that philosophy. JEREMY MAGGS: Martin Kingston, thank you so much for joining us. My name is Jeremy Maggs and thank you for listening to the FixSA podcast on Moneyweb. *This podcast was recorded before President Cyril Ramaphosa delivered his State of the Nation Address on 9 February.