The construction business of JSE-listed Basil Read is being frustrated in its efforts to emerge from business rescue by delays by clients in returning construction guarantees for completed projects. Basil Read CEO Khathutshelo ‘K2’ Mapasa said this week the company has completed its remaining old contracts, but delays with the return of construction guarantees and the finalisation of some of its claims mean it is unable to pay down its post-commencement finance. At the start of its business rescue process in June 2018, Basil Read had 27 active contracts. Mapasa said until the company has emerged from business rescue it will be unable to publish its financial results for the year to end-December 2022 – which will permit it to apply to the JSE for the lifting of the suspension in the trading of its shares. “No auditor is prepared to sign off on the financials as long as the business is in business rescue. It’s difficult for them to provide an audit opinion when there is so much uncertainty,” he said. Mapasa said Basil Read’s rescue practitioners obviously have to fulfil the rescue mandate, which is to get to a point where there is a compromise with the creditors so the business can be discharged out of rescue. Catch-22 He said just under R300 million in post-commencement financing was raised and “we have substantially less than R100 million, maybe even half of that, to repay”. “The expectation is to repay that amount when some of the construction guarantees are returned and with the finalisation of some of the claims. That really is the frustration we are dealing with at the moment.” Mapasa added that these guarantees are cash-backed in the sense that there is a substantial amount of cash that the guarantee providers took as part of the collateral when Basil Read went into business rescue. He said the guarantor is reluctant to release this cash while post-commencement finance is still outstanding and the agreement has not been cancelled. Mapasa said the delays with the return of the guarantees have been caused by “poor administration by some clients”. Tardy clients He said the major guarantees not yet returned relate to Basil Read’s Medupi power plant building project for Eskom and the Port Shepstone Magistrate’s Court contract for the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure (DPWI). Mapasa said the engineers on the Eskom contract have determined that the guarantees need to be returned, but “they just have not been returned to us”. Read: Basil Read CEO not losing any sleep over alleged R1bn overpayment by Eskom [Jul 2020] “It’s not great and we are having to resort to other measures, such legal processes … In the case of the [DPWI], we are actually in court. “Court processes can take a substantial amount of time and it’s really frustrating,” he said. Mapasa previously said Basil Read obtained a favourable ruling in the High Court in Pretoria in July 2020 against the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Public Works for the contract for the construction of the Port Shepstone magistrate’s court, which was 95% complete – but that it had to terminate because of non-payment of a certain amount of certified work. Mapasa said at the time the department was still refusing to pay despite the court judgment. Rescue practitioners’ view Matuson & Associates, Basil Read’s business rescue practitioners (BRPs), reported last month that the group continued operating steadily despite the contraction in the local and global economies. It confirmed Basil Read has completed all the contracts that were earmarked for completion and that the clients have issued the performance certificates for these contracts. They said Basil Read is now targeting the commercial close out, which includes final account determination and the return of construction guarantees for phase two of the Olifants River Water Resources Development Project for the Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority (TCTA) and the Eskom Medupi building project. The BRPs said the aggregate contingent liability in the form of construction guarantees has been reduced to R72.6 million compared with R1.1 billion at the beginning of the rescue proceedings. This should be lower now as Mapasa confirmed this week the construction guarantees for the TCTA project had been returned. The BRPs said Basil Read continues to pursue contract claims as it relies heavily on claims proceeds to meet its commitments. “Although there has been considerable progress in obtaining favourable rulings with respect to certain of these claims, some employers [clients] continue withholding payments necessitating additional legal action to enforce the rulings. “Thus, the timing of receipts of funds for these claims remains uncertain,” it said. Other operations … and a new R200m contract Mapasa said the mining services and property development businesses in the group, which did not enter business rescue, are “substantially okay and they more than wash their faces [break even]”. He said Basil Read has been looking for new construction work and, in a joint venture (JV) with a company he did not name, has been awarded a R200 million civil contract, despite still being in business rescue. Mapasa said the contract has been awarded but has not yet started and declined to provide details, because he did not have permission to do so from the JV partner. He said Basil Read only has 10% of the JV because its partner has taken 100% of the contract risk (providing the entire construction guarantee for the project). Mapasa stressed that it will be “very difficult” for Basil Read to provide construction guarantees for any projects while it is still in business rescue. “But we are able to complement each other in terms of skills, experience and insights with some of these guys we worked with in the past,” he said. Basil Read was placed into voluntary business rescue on 15 June 2018 after reporting a net loss after tax of R1 billion in March 2018,  for its 2017 financial year. An analyst who asked not to be named had said it would be difficult to revive Basil Read. This was because it had been ‘tarnished’ by going into rescue and would probably battle to find a bank or guarantor to back it, while clients are likely to be wary of contractors who are in business rescue and do not have strong balance sheets. Mapasa countered this view by stating that some of the guarantee providers have been working with Basil Read in derisking their exposure in loss-making contracts and have had a very positive experience with the company.